
===== PDF page index 516 =====
Chapter 28: Mathematical Applications 477 
upward potential was 65/s points, while the downward potential is about 5¾ points. 
This difference is due to the use of the lognormal distribution. 
Step 8: Using the Black-Scholes model, one could estimate that the XYZ 
January 40 call would be worth about 11/s if XYZ were at 35¼ in 90 days. 
Step 9: The risk potential in the January 40 call would be: 
. 4- l1/s 27/s Percent nsk = --- = - 72% 4 4 
Step 10: The reward/risk ratio is merely the percentage reward divided by the per­
centage risk: 
Reward/risk ratio = l03% = 1.43 72% 
Step 11: This analysis would be repeated for all XYZ options, and then for all other 
optionable stocks. The less aggressive call purchases would be ranked by their 
reward/risk ratios, with higher ratios representing more attractive purchases. More 
aggressive purchases would be ranked by the potential rewards only (step 5). 
This completes the call buying example. Before leaving this section, it should be 
noted that the assumption of ranking the purchases after one full standard deviation 
movement by the underlying stock is probably excessive. A more moderate assump­
tion would be that the stock might be able to move . 7 standard deviation. There is 
about a 25% expected chance that a stock could move up at least . 7 standard devia­
tion at the end of a fixed time period. 
PRICING A PUT OPTION 
Theoretical models for pricing put options have been derived; that is, ones that are 
separate from call pricing models. Black and Scholes presented such a model in their 
original paper. However, as has been demonstrated, there is a relationship between 
put and call prices in the listed option market due to the conversion and reversal 
strategies. 
One could use the ba,sic call pricing rrwdel for the purpose of predicting put 
prices if he a,ssumes that arbitrageurs will efficiently influence the market via con­
versions. Theoreticians will argue that such a method of pricing puts assumes that the 
arbitrage process is always present and works efficiently, and that this is not true. The 
"conversion efficiency" assumption could be a serious fault if one were trying to 
determine the exact overpriced or underpriced nature of the put option. However, if 
one is merely comparing various put strategies under constant assumptions, the arbi­
trage model for pricing puts works quite well. 
===== PDF page index 517 =====
478 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
The listed put' s price can be estimated by using the call pricing model and the 
arbitrage formula. Recall that the arbitrageur must include the cost of carrying the 
position as well as the dividends to be received. 
Theoretical Theoretical Strike Stock Carrying n· 'd d = + - - + IVI en s put call price price price cost 
The "theoretical call price" is obtained from the Black-Scholes model. The carrying 
cost is the cost of money (interest rate) times the striking price, multiplied by the 
time to expiration. Recall that this is the approximation formula for carrying cost (see 
Chapter 27 for comments on present value and compounding). Consequently, ifXYZ 
were at 41 and a 6-month January 40 call option were valued at 4 points by the 
Black-Scholes model, the theoretical put price could be estimated. Assume that the 
cost of money interest rate is 10% annually, and that the stock will pay $.50 in divi­
dends in 6 months (t = ½ year). 
Theoretical put price = 4 + 40 - 41- (.10 x 40 x ½) + .50 
=3-2+½ 
=l½ 
This means that if the call could be sold for 4 points, the arbitrageur would be will­
ing to pay up to 1 ½ points for the put to establish a conversion. The arbitrageur's 
price is used as the theoretical listed put price estimate. 
PUT BUYING 
Put option purchases can be ranked in a manner very similar to that described for call 
option buying. Reward opportunities occur when the stock falls in accordance with 
its volatility. An upward stock movement represents risk for the put buyer. All of the 
11 steps in the previous section on call buying are applicable to put buying. The pric­
ing of the put necessary for steps 4 and 8 is done in accordance with the arbitrage 
model just presented. 
If an underlying stock does not have listed puts trading, the synthetic put can 
be considered. While all U.S.-listed stocks have both puts and calls at every strike, 
there are still situations with warrants, especially in foreign countries, that are appli­
cable to the following discussion. Recall that synthetic puts are created for customers 
by some brokerage houses. The brokerage sells the stock short and buys a call. The 
customer can purchase the synthetic put for the amount of the risk involved, plus any 
dividends to be paid by the underlying stock. The synthetic put pricing formula that 
would be used in steps 4 and 8 of the option buying analysis is exactly the same as the 
arbitrage model for listed puts, except that the carrying costs are omitted: 
===== PDF page index 518 =====
Chapter 28: Mathematical Applications 479 
Theoretical synthetic Theoretical Strike Stock D" .d d = + - + 1vi en s put price call price price price 
When the ranking analysis is performed, very few synthetic puts will appear as 
attractive put buys. This is because, when the customer buys a synthetic put, he must 
advance the full cost of the dividend, but receives no offsetting cost reduction for the 
credit being earned by the short stock position. Consequently, synthetic puts are 
always more expensive, on a relative basis, than are listed puts. However, if one is par­
ticularly bearish on a stock that has no listed puts, a synthetic put may still prove to 
be a worthwhile investment. The recommended analysis can give him a feeling for 
the reward and risk potential of the investment. 
CALENDAR SPREADS 
The pricing nwdel can help in determining which neutral calendar spreads are nwst 
attractive. Recall that in a neutral calendar spread, one is selling a near-term call and 
buying a longer-term call, when the stock is relatively close to the striking price of the 
calls. The object of the spread is to capture the time decay differential between the 
two options. The neutral calendar spread is normally closed when the near-term 
option expires. The pricing model can aid the spreader by estimating what the prof­
it potential of the spread is, as well as helping in the determination of the break-even 
points of the position at near-term expiration. 
To determine the maximum profit potential of the spread, assume that the near­
term call expires worthless and use the pricing model to estimate the value of the 
longer-term call with the stock exactly at the striking price. Since commission costs 
are relatively large in spread transactions, it would be best to have the computations 
include commissions. Calculating a second profit potential is sometimes useful as 
well the profit if unchanged. To determine how much profit would be made if the 
stock were unchanged at near-term expiration, assume that the spread is closed with 
the near-term call equal to its intrinsic value (zero if the stock is currently below the 
strike, or the difference between the stock price and the strike if the stock is initial­
ly above the strike). Then use the pricing model to estimate the value of the longer­
term call, which will then have three or six months of life remaining, with the stock 
unchanged. The resulting differential between the near-term call's intrinsic value and 
the estimated value of the longer-term call is an estimate of the price at which the 
spread could be liquidated. The profit, of course, is that differential minus the cur­
rent (initial) differential, less commissions. 
In the earlier discussion of calendar spreads, it was pointed out that there is 
both an upside break-even point and a downside break-even point at near-term expi­
ration. These break-even points can be estimated with the use of the pricing model. 
===== PDF page index 519 =====
480 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
One method of determination involves estimating the liquidating value of the spread 
at successive stock prices. When the liquidating value is found to be equal to the ini­
tial value, plus commissions, a break-even point has been located. 
Example: If the spread in question is using options with a striking price of 30, one 
would begin his break-even point calculations at a price of 30. Estimate the liquidat­
ing value of the spread at 30, 297/s, 29¾, 29-5/s, and so forth until the break-even point 
is found. Once the downside break-even point has been determined in this manner, 
the iterations to locate the upside break-even point should begin again at the striking 
price. Thus, one would evaluate the liquidating value at 30, 301/s, 30¼, and so on. This 
is somewhat of a brute-force method, but with a computer it is fairly fast. The num­
ber of calculations can be reduced by adopting a more complicated iteration process. 
A final useful piece of information can be obtained with the aid of the pricing 
model - the theoretical value of the spread. Recompute the estimated value of both 
the near-term and longer-term calls at the current time and stock price, using the 
implied volatility for the underlying stock. The resultant differential between the two 
estimated call prices may differ substantially from the actual differential, perhaps 
highlighting an attractive calendar spread situation. One would want to establish 
spreads in which the theoretical differential is greater than the actual differential 
(that is, he would want to buy a "cheap" calendar spread). 
Once these pieces of information have been computed, the strategist can rank 
the spread possibilities by whatever criterion he finds most workable. The logical 
method of ranking the spreads is by their return if unchanged. The spreads with the 
highest return if unchanged at near-term expiration are those in which the stock price 
and striking price were close together initially, a basic requirement of the neutral cal­
endar spread. More complicated ranking systems should tty to include the theoreti­
cal value of the spread and possibly even the maximum potential of the spread. A 
similar analysis can, of course, be worked out for put calendar spreads, using the 
arbitrage pricing model for puts. 
RATIO STRATEGIES 
Ratio strategies involve selling naked options. Therefore, the strategist has potential­
ly large risk, either to the upside or to the downside or both. He should attempt to 
get a feeling for how probable this risk is. The formulae for determining the proba­
bility of a stock being above or below a certain price at some time in the future can 
give him these probabilities. For example, in a straddle writing situation, the strate­
gist would want to compute such arithmetic quantities as maximum profit potential, 
return if unchanged, collateral required at upside break-even point or at upside 
===== PDF page index 520 =====
Chapter 28: Mathematical Applications 481 
action point (recall that the collateral requirement increases for naked options on an 
adverse stock movement), and the break-even points themselves. The probabilities of 
being above the upper break-even point at expiration or below the lower break-even 
point should be computed as well. Moreover, an expected return analysis could be 
performed on the position to determine the general level of profitability of the posi­
tion with respect to all other positions of the same type on other stocks. Such an 
expected return analysis need not assume that the position is held to expiration. Firm 
traders, paying little or no commissions, might be interested in seeing the expected 
reswts for a holding period as short as 30 days or less. Public customers might use a 
longer holding period, on the assumption that they would not trade the position as 
readily because of commission costs. Ratio positions should be ranked either by 
return if unchanged or by expected return. 
The analyses described for calendar spreads and ratio positions should not be 
relied upon as gospel. In the proposed forms of analysis, one is projecting future 
option prices and stock prices under the assumption that the volatility of the under­
lying stock will remain the same. Although this may be true in some cases, there will 
also be many times when the volatility of the underlying stock will change during the 
life of the position. If the volatility decreases, the projected break-even points for a 
calendar spread will be too far away from the striking price. Thus, a loss would result 
at some prices where the spreader expected to make money. If the volatility increas­
es, the expected return of a ratio position will drop, because the probabilities of the 
stock moving outside the profit range will increase, thereby increasing the probabil­
ity ofloss. 
The effect of a changing volatility can be counteracted, in theory, by continuing 
to monitor the position daily after it has been established. In a straddle write, for 
example, if the stock begins to move dramatically, the expected return may become 
very low. If this happens, adjustments could be made to the position to improve it. 
Such monitoring is difficult to apply in practice for the public customer, because the 
commission costs involved in constant position adjustments would mount rapidly. 
There is no exact method that would allow for infrequent, periodic adjustments, but 
by using a follow-up analysis the public customer may be able to get a better feeling 
for the timing of adjusting a position. For example, suppose that one initially wrote a 
5-point straddle when the stock was at 30. Sometime later, the stock is at 34. The 
expected return of writing a 5-point straddle with a strike of 30 when the stock is at 
34 could be computed for the shorter time period remaining until expiration. If the 
expected return is negative, an adjustment needs to be made. Adopting this form of 
adjusting would keep the number of trades to a minimum, but would still allow the 
strategist to determine when his position has become improperly balanced. Of 
course, the current volatility would be used in making these determinations. Another 
===== PDF page index 521 =====
482 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
follow-up monitoring technique, using the deltas of the options involved, is present­
ed later in this chapter, and has been described several times previously. 
FACILITATION OR INSTITUTIONAL BLOCK POSITIONING 
In this and the following section, the advantages of using the hedge ratio are outlined. 
These strategies are primarily member firm, not public customer, strategies, since 
they are best applied in the absence of commission costs. An institutional block trad­
er may be able to use options to help him in his positioning, particularly when he is 
trying to help a client in a stock transaction. 
Suppose that a block trader wants to make a bid for stock to facilitate a cus­
tomer's sell order. If he wants some sort of a hedge until he can sell the stock that he 
buys, and the stock has listed options, he can sell some options to hedge his stock 
position. To determine the quantity of options to sell, he can use the hedge ratio. The 
exact formula for the hedge ratio was given earlier in this chapter, in the section on 
the Black-Scholes pricing model. It is one of the components of the formula. Simply 
stated, the hedge ratio is merely the delta of the option - that is, the amount by which 
the option will change in price for small changes in the stock price. By selling the cor­
rect number of calls against his stock purchase, the block trader will have a neutral 
position. This position would, in theory, neither gain nor lose for small changes in the 
stock price. He is therefore buying himself time until he can unwind the position in 
the open market. 
Example: A trader buys 10,000 shares of XYZ, and a January 30 call is trading with 
a hedge ratio of .50. To have a neutral position, the trader should sell options against 
20,000 shares of stock (10,000 divided by .50 equals 20,000). Thus, he should sell 200 
of the January 30's. If the hedge ratio is correct - largely a function of the volatility 
estimate of the underlying stock - the trader will have greatly eliminated risk or 
reward on the position for small stock movements. Of course, if the block trader 
wants to assume some risk, that is a different matter. However, for the purposes of 
this discussion, the assumption is made that the block trader merely wants to facili­
tate the trade in the most risk-free manner possible. In this sample position, if the 
stock moves up by 1 point, the option should move up by ½ point. The trader would 
make $10,000 on his stock position and would lose $10,000 on his 200 short options 
- he has no gain or loss. Once the trader has the neutral position established, he can 
then begin to concentrate on unwinding the position. 
In actual practice, this hedge ratio may not work exactly, because it tends to 
change constantly as the stock price changes. If the trader finds the stock moving 
===== PDF page index 522 =====
Chapter 28: Mathematical Applications 483 
more than fractionally, he may have to add more calls or buy some in, to maintain a 
neutral hedge ratio. This would expose him to some risk, but the risk is substantially 
smaller than if he had not hedged at all. Of course, there would also be certain cases 
in which he would profit by the stock price change. For example, implied volatility 
could decrease, making the calls cheaper. 
A similar hedge can be established by the block trader who sells stock to accom­
modate a customer buy order. He could buy calls in accordance with the hedge ratio, 
to set up a neutral position. 
This process off acilitation is quite widely practiced, especially by brokerage 
houses that are trying to attract the business of the large institutional customer. Since 
the introduction of listed call options and their applications for facilitating orders, 
many quotes for large blocks of stock have improved considerably. The block trader 
(who works for the brokerage house) is willing to make a higher bid or a lower offer 
if he can use options to hedge his position. This facilitation with options results in a 
better market (higher bid or lower off er) from the point of view of the institutional 
customer. Without the availability of such listed options, the block trader would prob­
ably make a bid or an offer that was substantially away from the prevailing market 
price in order to work out of his stock-only position with a lessened degree of risk 
This would obviously present a poorer market for the institutional customer. 
THE NEUTRAL SPREAD 
The hedge ratios of two or more options may be used to determine a neutral spread. 
This strategy is especially useful to market-makers on the options exchanges who may 
want to reduce the risk of options bought or sold in the process of providing a pub­
lic market. If the hedge ratios of two options are known, the neutral ratio is deter­
mined by dividing the two hedge ratios. 
Example: An XYZ January 35 has a hedge ratio of .25, and an XYZ January 30 has a 
hedge ratio of .50, so a neutral ratio would be 2:1 (.50 divided by .25). That is, one 
would sell 2 January 35's against one long January 30, or, conversely, would buy 2 
January 35's against one short January 30. Thus, a market-maker who has just bought 
50 January 30's in an effort to provide a market for a public seller of that call could 
hedge his position by selling 100 January 35's. This should keep his risk small, for 
small stock price changes, until he can unwind the position. The ratio for the neutral 
spread is not as sensitive to the volatility estimate of the underlying stock as is the 
ratio concerning stock and options. This is because the same volatility estimate is 
applied to both options, and the resultant ratio for the spread would not tend to 
change greatly. 
===== PDF page index 523 =====
484 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
The risk trader can also use the neutral spread ratio to his advantage. This con­
cept was illustrated several times in previous chapters describing ratio writing, ratio 
spreads, and straddle writes. Ratio spreads are quite popular with member firm 
traders and floor traders. Recall that a ratio spread consists of buying options at acer­
tain strike, and selling more options further out-of-the-money. The hedge ratios can, 
of course, be used by the trader, or by a public customer, to initially establish a neu­
tral position. Perhaps more important, the hedge ratio can also be used as a follow­
up action to keep the position neutral after the stock changes in price. This strategy 
is the "delta spread" described in Chapter 11. 
The risk trader is not attempting to establish the spread with the idea of mini­
mizing risk for small stock movements. Rather, he is looking to make a profit, but 
would prefer to remain as neutral as possible on the underlying stock. He is imple­
menting a risk strategy that has a neutral outlook on the underlying stock. He is sell­
ing much more time value premium than he is buying. 
Example: The purchase of 15 January 30 calls and the sale of 30 January 35 calls - a 
ratio call spread - may be a position taken for profit potential. It would be a neutral 
position if the deltas were .60 and .30, for example. This spread would do best if the 
stock were at exactly 35 at expiration. However, if the stock rose quickly before expi­
ration, the spread ratio would decrease from 2:1 to perhaps 3:2. That is, the neutral 
ratio between the January 30 call and the January 35 call should be 3 short January 
35's to 2 long January 30's. If the trader wants to balance his position, he could buy 5 
more January 30's, giving him a total of 20 long versus the 30 short January 35's that 
he originally sold. Conversely, if the stock dropped in price, the neutral spread ratio 
might increase, indicating that more calls should be sold. For example, if this stock 
declines, the neutral ratio might be 3:1. In that case, 15 more January 35's could be 
sold, making the position short 45 calls versus 15 long calls, which would produce the 
neutral 3:1 ratio. 
It would not be proper to adjust the ratio constantly, because the frequent 
whipsaw losses on trading movements would wipe out the profit potential of the posi­
tion. However, the trader may want to pick out points, in advance, at which he wants 
to reevaluate his position before something drastic goes wrong. For example, if the 
foregoing spread were established with the stock at a price of 30, the spreader might 
want to readjust at 33 or 27, whichever comes first. 
By monitoring the spread using the hedge ratio, the trader may also be able to 
discern whether he has established too bullish or too bearish a position. 
Example: The trader starts with the example described above - long 15 January 30 
calls and short 30 January 35 calls - when the hedge ratios were .60 and .30, respec-
===== PDF page index 524 =====
Chapter 28: Mathematical Applications 485 
tively. Some later time, the stock falls to 27 and the trader needs to reevaluate his 
position. The hedge ratios may have become .42 for the January 30 and .14 for the 
January 35, indicating that a 3:1 ratio would be neutral (.42/.14 = 3). He now has a 
bullish position, because his 2:1 ratio is less than the neutral 3:1 ratio. It is not manda­
tory that the trader act on this information. He may actually be bullish on the stock 
at this point and decide to remain with his position. The usefulness of the hedge ratio 
is that it allows him to see that his position is bullish, so he can make a correct judg­
ment. Without this knowledge, he might still think his position to be neutral, a criti­
cal mistake if he indeed wants to be neutral. If the trader's ratio is greater than the 
neutral ratio (2:1 vs. 3:2, for example), he is bearishly positioned. 
As a final point, it should be noted that the ratio can be adjusted by buying or 
selling either option. 
Example: If the stock falls and it is desired that the ratio be increased to 3:1, one 
might sell more January 35's or might decide to sell out some of his January 30's. A 
bullish adjustment could be made by buying on either side of the spread in a similar 
manner. In general, one should adjust by selling time premium or buying intrinsic 
value. That is, out-of-the-moneys are usually sold and in-the-moneys are usually 
bought, when adjusting. 
AIDING IN FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
The computer can also be an invaluable aid to the strategist in that it can help him 
monitor his positions. It is generally necessary for the strategist to have some way of 
inputting his positions into an inventory database and also to have some way of iden­
tifying different securities that are grouped within the same trading position. Once 
this has been done, the computer can simultaneously read pricing data ( either real­
time or closing prices) and the inventory database to generate information concern­
ing the current status of any position. 
A current mark to market (profit and loss) statement is of obvious use in that 
the trader can see how he is doing each day. The computer can also easily generate 
a set of warning flags that may be of interest to the trader, and could produce a list 
summarizing possible positions that need action. In most of the strategies that were 
described, it was shown that the strategist should avoid early assignment if at all pos­
sible. It is a simple matter for the computer to calculate the remaining time value 
premium of any short options, and to warn the trader if there is only a small amount 
of time value premium remaining, perhaps ½ point or less. For similar reasons, the 
trader may want to have a daily list of positions that are nearing maturity, perhaps 
===== PDF page index 525 =====
486 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
with less than I month oflife remaining in the options. A flag indicating an approach­
ing ex-dividend date might also be useful for this purpose. 
If the trader inputs another piece of information into the database, the com­
puter can help him in another follow-up action. In most strategies that were 
described, especially those involving uncovered options, the trader wants to take 
some sort of follow-up action based on the price movement of the underlying stock. 
If the stock rallies too far, he may want to cover short calls or buy other calls as pro­
tection. If the stock declines too far, similar maneuvers would apply to put options or 
to rolling down short calls. If the trader inputs the stock prices at which he would like 
to take action, the computer can monitor each day's closing price of the stock and 
generate a list of positions that have exceeded their upside or downside action points. 
The computer can also do more sophisticated types of position monitoring. 
Recall that it was pointed out that the deltas of the options involved in a position can 
be compared to each other to tell whether the position is bullish or bearish. The 
Black-Scholes model can be used to calculate the deltas of the options in one's posi­
tions. Then the net position can be determined by the computer, thereby telling the 
trader whether his position has become "delta long" (bullish), "delta short" (bearish), 
or neutral. If he sees that a position is bearish and he does not want to be structured 
in that way, he can make bullish adjustments. The delta spread and neutral spread 
strategies very conveniently lend themselves to such types of follow-up action, 
although any of the more complicated straddle writing and protected straddle writ­
ing positions can be monitored usefully in this way as well. 
The computation for determining whether a position is net short or net long 
generally involves calculating the "equivalent stock position" (ESP). If one owns 10 
calls that have a delta of .45, his equivalent stock position from those calls is IO X 100 
shares per call x .45 = 450. That is, owning those IO calls is equivalent to owning 450 
shares of the underlying stock, according to the delta. All puts and calls can be 
reduced to an ESP and can then, of course, be combined with any actual long or 
short stock in the position to produce an ESP for the entire strategy. The resultant 
ESP for each of the trader's positions can be printed from the computer along with 
the items described above. 
Further sophisticated measures can be taken. The computer can generate a 
table of results at expiration. If so desired, this could be presented as a graph, but that 
is not really necessary. A table suffices quite well, as shown by most of the examples 
in this book. Such a picture has meaning only if all options in the position expire at 
the same time. If they don't, one may instead want the computer to mmpose a table 
of results or a graph at near-term expiration. Thus, in a calendar spread, for example, 
one could see what sorts of profitability he would be looking at when it was time to 
remove the spread. 
===== PDF page index 526 =====
Chapter 28: Mathematical Applications 487 
Finally, the computer can compute the expected return of a position already in 
place. This would give a more dynamic picture of the position, and this expected 
return is usually for a relatively short time period. That time period might be 30 days, 
or the time remaining until expiration, whichever is less. The expected return is cal­
culated in much the same manner as the expected return computation described ear­
lier in this chapter. First, one uses the stock's volatility to construct a range of prices 
over which to examine the position. Second, one uses the Black-Scholes model to 
calculate the values of the various options in the position at that future time and at 
the various stock prices. Some of the results should be displayed in table form by the 
computer program. The expected profit is computed, as described earlier, by sum­
ming the multiples of the probabilities of the stock being at each price by the result 
of the position at that price. The expected return is then computed by dividing the 
expected profit by the expected investment. Since margin computations can require 
involved computer programs, it is sufficient to omit this last step and merely observe 
the expected profit. The following example shows how a sample position might look 
as the computer displays the position itself, the ESP, the profit at expiration, and the 
expected profit in 30 days. A complex position is assumed, in order that the value of 
these analyses can be demonstrated. 
Example: The following position exists when XYZ is at 31 ¾. It is essentially a back­
spread combined with a reverse ratio write. It resembles a long straddle in that there 
is increased profit potential in either direction if the stock moves far enough by expi­
ration. Initially, the computer should display the position and the ESP. 
Position Delta ESP 
Short 4,500 XYZ 1.00 Short 4,500 shares 
Short 100 XYZ April 25 calls 0.89 Short 8, 900 shares 
Long 50 XYZ April 30 calls 0.76 Long 3,800 shares 
Long 139 XYZ July 30 calls 0.74 Long 10,286 shares 
Total ESP Long 686 shares 
Total money in position: $163,500 credit 
The advantage of using the ESP is that this fairly complex position is reduced to a sin­
gle number. The entire position is equivalent to being long 686 shares of the com­
mon stock. Essentially, this is close to delta-neutral for such a large position. The next 
item that the computer should display is the total credit or debit in the position to 
date. With this information, an expiration picture can be drawn if it is applicable. In 
this position, since there is a mixture of April and July options, a strict expiration pie-
===== PDF page index 527 =====
488 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
ture does not apply. Rather, the computer should draw a picture based on the posi­
tion at April expiration or on a shorter time horizon. 
Assume that April expiration is still some time away, so that the computer will 
instead draw the picture 30 days hence. In order to do so, the computer uses the 
stock's volatility to project stock prices 30 days in the future. Seven stock prices are 
shown in the next table; they represent points along the distribution curve of the 
stock, ranging from minus one and one-half standard deviations to plus one and one­
half standard deviations of movement from the current stock price. While these 
seven points certainly do not comprise the entire spectrum of possible stock moves, 
they are a representative sample. 
Stock Price Standard Expected 
in 30 Days Deviations Results 
353/a + 1.5 +$15,847 
34 1/a +1.0 + 12,355 
327/a +0.5 + 10,097 
31 3/4 0.0 + 9,443 
305/a -0.5 + 10,743 
291/2 -1.0 + 14,172 
281/2 -1.5 + 19,605 
Expected profit +$11,426 
Obviously, this position has had some profitable adjustments made to it in the past. 
That is not important at this point, because the trader is interested only in the future. 
If the current mark to market of this position were in excess of $11,426, then he 
should consider removing the position, since it would be more profitable than the 
expected profit. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Many of the analyses described in this chapter can be obtained from a reliable data 
service or brokerage firm. The strategist who plans to prepare his own analysis, either 
by himself or by contracting the programming work out, should be aware that com­
puter programs cannot be written in the COBOL language, because the mathemat­
ics are far too complicated for a business language. Languages such as Pascal, C, 
C++, Visual Basic, or any high-level structured programming language would suffice, 
although Java could be considered as well, keeping in mind that Java's main usage is 
not for computational purposes. Reliable option pricing data that include dividend 
===== PDF page index 528 =====
Chapter 28: Mathematical Applications 489 
information on the underlying stock are also necessary. The larger programmable cal­
culators can handle calculations such as the Black-Scholes model, computing the 
hedge ratio, and determining the probability of a stock being above or below a cer­
tain price at some future time. However, more involved calculations, such as com­
puting the implied volatility or determining the expected return of a position, require 
the use of a computer. 
SUMMARY 
Two basic mathematical aids have been presented: the pricing model and the ability 
to predict the probability of a stock's movement. The hedge ratio and the expected 
return analysis are extensions of the basic aids. Any strategy can be evaluated with 
these tools. Such an analysis should be able to give the trader or strategist some idea 
of the relative attractiveness of establishing the position, and may also aid in making 
follow-up adjustments to the position. All the analyses rely heavily on one's estimate 
of the volatility of the underlying stock Using the implied volatility seems to be one 
of the best ways to obtain an accurate, current volatility estimate, since it is derived 
from the prices in the market itself. The applications presented here are not all-inclu­
sive. The strategist who is, or becomes, familiar with the advantages of rigorous math­
ematical analysis will be able to construct many other aids for his trading that utilize 
the basic mathematics described in this chapter. 
===== PDF page index 529 =====

===== PDF page index 530 =====
