
===== PDF page index 453 =====
414 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
mitments to option purchases so that his overall risk in a one-year period can be kept 
down to nearly 10%. 
Example: An investor might decide to put 2½% of his money into three-month 
option purchases. Thus, in any one year, he would be 1isking 10%. At the same time 
he would be earning perhaps 6% from the overall interest generated on the fixed­
income securities that make up the remaining 90% of his assets. This would keep his 
overall risk down to approximately 4.6% per year. 
There are better ways to monitor this risk, and they are described shortly. The 
potential profits from this strategy are limited only by time. Since one is owning 
options - say call options - he could profit handsomely from a large upward move in 
the stock market. As with any strategy in which one has limited risk and the poten­
tial of large profits, a small number of large profits could offset a large number of 
small losses. In actual practice, of course, his profits will never be overwhelming, 
since only approximately 10% of the money is committed to option purchases. 
In total, this strategy has greatly reduced 1isk with the potential of making 
above-average profits. Since the 10% of the money that is invested in options gives 
great leverage, it might be possible for that portion to double or triple in a short time 
under favorable market conditions. This strategy is something like owning a convert­
ible bond. A convertible bond, since it is convertible into the common stock, moves 
up and down in price with the price of the underlying stock. However, if the stock 
should fall a great deal, the bond will not follow it all the way down, because eventu­
ally its yield will provide a "floor" for the price. 
A strategy that is not used very often is called the "synthetic convertible bond." 
One buys a debenture and a call option on the same stock. If the stock rises in price, 
the call does too, and so the combination of the debenture and the call acts much like 
a convertible bond would to the upside. If, on the other hand, the stock falls, the call 
will expire worthless; but the investor will retain most of his investment, because he 
will still have the debenture plus any interest that the bond has paid. 
The strategy of placing 90% of one's money into risk-free, interest-bearing cer­
tificates and buying options with the remainder is superior to the convertible bond 
or the "synthetic convertible bond," since there is no risk of price fluctuation in the 
largest portion of the investment. 
The Treasury bill/option strategy is fairly easy to operate, although one does 
have to do some work every time new options are purchased. Also, periodic adjust­
ments need to be made to keep the level of risk approximately the same at all times. 
As for which options to buy, the reader may recall that specifications were outlined 
in Chapters 3 and 16 on how to select the best option purchases. These criteria can 
be summarized briefly as follows: 
===== PDF page index 454 =====
Chapter 26: Buying Options and Treasury Bills 415 
1. Assume that each underlying stock can advance or decline in accordance with its 
volatility over a fixed time period (30, 60, or 90 days). 
2. Estimate the call prices after the advance, or put prices after the decline. 
3. Rank all potential purchases by the highest reward opportunity. 
The user of this strategy need only be interested in those option purchases that 
provide the highest reward opportunity under this ranking method. In the previous 
chapters on option buying, it was mentioned that one might want to look at the 
risk/reward ratios of his potential option purchases in order to have a more conser­
vative list. However, that is not necessary in the Treasury bill/option strategy, since 
the overall risk has already been limited. A ranking of option purchases via the fore­
going criteria will generally give a list of at- or slightly out-of-the-money options. 
These are not necessarily "underpriced" options; although if an option is truly under­
priced, it will have a better chance of ranking higher on the selection list than one 
that is "overpriced." 
A list of potential option purchases that is constructed with criteria similar to 
those outlined above is available from many data services and brokerage firms. The 
strategist who is willing to select his option purchases in this manner will find that he 
does not have to spend a great deal of time on the selection process. The reader 
should note that this type of option purchase ranking completely ignores the outlook 
for the underlying stock. If one would rather make his purchases based on an outlook 
for the underlying stock - preferably a technical outlook - he will be forced to spend 
more time on his selection process. Although this may be appealing to some 
investors, it will probably yield worse results in the long run than the previously 
described unbiased approach to option purchases, unless the strategist is extremely 
adept at stock selection. 
KEEPING THE RISK LEVEL EQUAL 
The second function that the strategist has to perform in this Treasury bill/option 
strategy is to keep his risk level approximately equal at all times. 
Example: An investor starts the strategy with $90,000 in Treasury bills (T-bills) and 
$10,000 in option purchases. After some time has passed, the option purchases may 
have worked out well and perhaps he now has $90,000 in T-bills plus $30,000 worth 
of options, plus interest from the T-bills. Obviously, he no longer has 90% of his 
money in fixed-income securities and 10% in option purchases. The ratio is now 75% 
in T-bills and 25% in option purchases. This is too risky a ratio, and the strategist 
must consequently sell some of his options and buy T-bills with the proceeds. Since 
his total assets are $120,000 currently, he must sell out $18,000 of options to bring his 
===== PDF page index 455 =====
416 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
option investment down from the current $30,000 figure to $12,000, or 10% of his 
total assets. If one fails to adhere to this readjustment of his funds after profits are 
made, he may eventually lose those profits. Since options can lose a great percentage 
of their worth in a short time pe1iod, the investor is always running the risk that the 
option portion of his investment may be nearly wiped out. If he has kept all his prof­
its in the option portion of his strategy, he is constantly risking nearly all of his accu­
mulated profits, and that is not wise. 
One must also adjust his ratio of T-bills to options after losses occur. 
Example: In the first year, the strategist loses all of the $10,000 he originally placed 
in options. This would leave him with total assets of $90,000 plus interest (possibly 
$6,000 of interest might be earned). He could readjust to a 90:10 ratio by selling out 
some of the T-bills and using the proceeds to buy options. If one follows this strate­
gy, he will be risking 10% of his funds each year. Thus, a series of loss years could 
depreciate the initial assets, although the net losses in one year would be smaller than 
10% because of the interest earned on the T-bills. It is recommended that the strate­
gist pursue this method of readjusting his ratios in both up and down markets in 
order to constantly provide himself with essentially similar risk/reward opportunities 
at all times. 
The individual can blend the option selection process and the adjustment of the 
T-bill/option ratio to fit his individual portfolio. The larger portfolio can be diversi­
fied into options \vith differing holding periods, and the ratio adjustments can be 
made quite frequently, perhaps once a month. The smaller investor should concen­
trate on somewhat longer holding periods for his options, and would adjust the ratio 
less often. Some examples might help to illustrate the way in which both the large 
and small strategist might operate. It should be noted that this T-bill/option strategy 
is quite adaptable to fairly small sums of money, as long as the 10% that is going to 
be put into option purchases allows one to be able to participate in a reasonable man­
ner. A tactic for the extremely small investor is also described below. 
ANNUALIZED RISK 
Before getting into portfolio size, let us describe the concept of annualized risk. 
One might want to purchase options with the intent of holding some of them for 30 
days, some for 90 days, and some for 180 days. Recall that he does not want his 
option purchases to represent more than 10% annual risk at any time. In actual 
practice, if one purchases an option that has 90 days of life, but he is planning to 
hold the option only 30 days, he will most likely not lose 100% of his investment in 
===== PDF page index 456 =====
Chapter 26: Buying Options and Treasury Bills 417 
the 30-day period. However, for purposes of computing annualized risk easily, the 
assumption that will be made is that the risk during any holding period is 100%, 
regardless of the length of time remaining in the life of the option. Thus, a 30-day 
option purchase represents an annualized risk of 1,200% (100% risk every 30 days 
times twelve 30-day periods in one year). Ninety-day purchases have 400% annual­
ized risk, and 180-day purchases have 200% annualized risk. There is a multitude 
of ways to combine purchases in these three holding periods so that the overall risk 
is 10% annualized. 
Example: An investor could put 2½% of his total money into 90-day purchases four 
times a year. That is, 2½% of his total assets are being subjected to a 400% annual­
ized risk; 400% times 2½% equals 10% annualized risk on the total assets. Of course, 
the remainder of the assets would be placed in risk-free, income-bearing securities. 
Another of the many combinations might be to place 1 % of the total assets in 90-day 
purchases and also place 3% of the total assets in 180-day purchases. Thus, 1 % of 
one's total money would be subjected to a 400% annual risk and 3% would be sub­
jected to a 200% annual risk (.01 times 400 plus .03 times 200 equals 10% annualized 
risk on the entire assets). If one prefers a formula, annualized risk can be computed 
as: 
A al. d • k • r 1. Percent of total 360 nnu 1ze ns on entire portro 10 = d x assets investe Holding period 
If one is able to diversify into several holding periods, the annualized risk is merely 
the sum of the risks for each holding period. 
With this information in mind, the strategist can utilize option purchases of 1 
month, 3 months, and 6 months, preferably each generated by a separate computer 
analysis similar to the one described earlier. He will know how much of his total 
assets he can place into purchases of each holding period, because he will know his 
annualized risk. 
Example: Suppose that a very large investor, or pool of investors, has $1 million com­
mitted to this T-bill/option strategy. Further, suppose ½ of 1 % of the money is to be 
committed to 30-day option purchases with the idea of reinvesting every 30 days. 
Similarly, ½ of 1 % is to be placed in 90-day purchases and 1 % in 180-day purchases. 
The annualized risk is 10%: 
Total annualized risk = ½% x 360 + ½% x 360 + 1 % x 360 
30 90 180 
= .06 + .02 + .02 = 10% 
===== PDF page index 457 =====
418 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
With asset.s of $1 million, this means that $.5,000 would be committed to 30-day pur­
chases; $.5,000 to 90-day purchases; and $10,000 to 180-day purchases. This money 
would be reinvested in similar quantities at the end of each holding period. 
RISK ADJUSTMENT 
The subject of adjusting the ratio to constantly reflect 10% risk must be addressed at 
the end of each holding period. Although it is correct for the investor to keep his per­
centage commitments constant, he must not be deluded into automatically reinvest­
ing the same amount of dollars each time. 
Example: At the end of 30 days, the value of the entire portfolio, including potential 
option profits and losses, and interest earned, was down to $990,000. Then only ½ of 
1 % of that amount should be invested in the next 30-day purchase ($4,9.50). 
By operating in this manner - first computing the annualized risk and balanc­
ing it through predetermined percentage commitments to holding periods of various 
lengths; and second, readjusting the actual dollar commitment at the end of each 
holding period - the overall risk/reward ratios v,ill be kept close to the levels 
described in the earlier, simple desciiption of this strategy. This may require a rela­
tively large amount of work on the part of the strategist, but large portfolios usually 
do require work. 
The smaller investor does not have the luxury of such complete diversification, 
but he also does not have to adjust his total position as often. 
Example: An investor decided to commit $.50,000 to this strategy. Since there is a 
1,200% annualized risk in 30-day purchases, it does not make much sense to even 
consider purchases that are so short-term for assets of this size. Rather, he might 
decide to commit 1 % of his assets to a 90-day purchase and 3% to a 180-day pur­
chase. In dollar amounts, this would be $.500 in a 90-day option and $1,.500 in 180-
day options. Admittedly, this does not leave much room for diversification, but to risk 
more in the short-term purchases would expose the investor to too much risk. In 
actual practice, this investor would probably just invest .5% of his assets in 180-day 
purchases, also a 10% annualized risk. This would mean that he could operate with 
only one option buyer's analysis (the 180-day one) and could place $2,.500 into selec­
tions from that list. 
His adjustments of the assets committed to option purchases could not be done 
as frequently as the large investor, because of the commissions involved. He certain­
ly would have to adjust every 180 days, but might prefer to do so more frequently -
perhaps every 90 days - to be able to space his 180-day commitments over different 
===== PDF page index 458 =====
Chapter 26: Buying Options and Treasury Bills 419 
option expiration cycles. It should also be pointed out that T-bills can be bought and 
sold only in amounts of at least $10,000 and in increments of $5,000 thereafter. That 
is, one could buy or sell $10,000 or $15,000 or $20,000 or $25,000, and so on, but 
could not buy or sell $5,000 or $8,000 or $23,000 in T-bills. This is of little concern 
to the investor with $1 million, since it takes only a fraction of a percentage of his 
assets to be able to round up to the next $5,000 increment for a T-bill sale or pur­
chase. However, the medium-sized investor with a $50,000 portfolio might run into 
problems. While short-term T-bills do represent the best risk-free investment, the 
medium-sized investor might want to utilize one of the no-load, money market funds 
for at least part of his income-bearing assets. Such funds have only slightly more risk 
than T-bills and offer the ability to deposit and withdraw in any amount. 
The truly small investor might be feeling somewhat left out. Could it be possi­
ble to operate this strategy with a very small amount of money, such as $5,000? Yes 
it could, but there are several disadvantages. 
Example: It would be extremely difficult to keep the risk level down to 10% annual­
ly with only $5,000. For example, 5% of the money invested every 180 days is only 
$250 in each investment period. Since the option selection process that is described 
will tend to select at- or slightly out-of-the-money calls, many of these will cost more 
than 2½ points for one option. The small investor might decide to raise his risk level 
slightly, although the risk level should never exceed 20% annually, no matter how 
small the actual dollar investment. To exceed this risk level would be to completely 
defeat the purpose of the fixed-income/option purchase strategy. Obviously, this 
small investor cannot buy T-bills, for his total investable assets are below the mini­
mum $10,000 purchase level. He might consider utilizing one of the money market 
funds. Clearly, an investor of this small magnitude is operating at a double disadvan­
tage: His small dollar commitment to option purchases may preclude him from buy­
ing some of the more attractive items; and his fixed-income portion will be earning a 
smaller percentage interest rate than that of the larger investor who is in T-bills or 
some other form of relatively risk-free, income-bearing security. Consequently, the 
small investor should carefully consider his financial capability and willingness to 
adhere strictly to the criteria of this strategy before actually committing his dollars. 
It may appear to the reader that the actual dollars being placed at risk in each 
option purchase are quite small in these examples. In fact, they are rather small, but 
they have been shown to represent 10% annualized risk. An assumption was made in 
these examples that the risk in each option purchase was 100% for the holding peri­
od. This is a fairly restrictive assumption and, if it were lessened, would allow for a 
larger dollar commitment in each holding period. It is difficult and dangerous, how-
===== PDF page index 459 =====
420 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
ever, to assume that the risk in holding a call option is less than 100% in a holding 
period as short as 30 days. The strategist may feel that he is disciplined enough to sell 
out when losses occur and thereby hold the risk to less than 100%. Alternatively, 
mathematical analysis will generally show that the expected loss in a fixed time peri­
od is less than 100%. One can also mitigate the probability oflosing all of his money 
in an option purchase by buying in-the-money options. While they are more expen­
sive, of course, they do have a larger probability of having some residual worth even 
if the underlying stock doesn't rise to the trader's expectations. Adhering to any of 
these criteria can lead one to become too aggressive and therefore be too heavily 
committed to option purchases. It is far safer to stick to the simpler, more restrictive 
assumption that one is risking all his money, even over a fairly short holding period, 
when he buys an option. 
AVOIDING EXCESSIVE RISK 
One final word of caution must be inserted. The investor should not attempt to 
become 'Janey" with the income-bearing portion of his assets. T-bills may appear to 
be too "tame" to some investors, and they consider using GNMA's (Government 
National Mortgage Association certificates), corporate bonds, convertible bonds, or 
municipal bonds for the fixed-income portion. Although the latter securities may 
yield a slightly higher return than do T-bills, they may also prove to be less liquid and 
they quite clearly involve more risk than a short-term T-bill does. Moreover, some 
investors might even consider placing the balance of their funds in other places, such 
as high-yield stock or covered call writing. While high-yield stock purchases and cov­
ered call writing are conservative investments, as most investments go, they would 
have to be considered very speculative in comparison to the purchase of a 90-day T­
hill. In this strategy, the profit potential is represented by the option purchases. The 
yield on short-term T-bills will quite adequately offset the risks. One should take 
great care not to attempt to generate much higher yields on the fixed-income portion 
of his investment, for he may find that he has assumed risk with the portion of his 
money that was not intended to have any risk at all. 
A fair amount of rigorous mathematical work has been done on the evaluation 
of this strategy. The theoretical papers are quite favorable. Scholars have generally 
considered only the purchase of call options as the risk portion of the strategy. 
Obviously, the strategist is quite free to purchase put options without harming the 
overall intent of the strategy. When only call options are purchased, both static and 
down markets harm the performance. If some puts are included in the option pur­
chases, only static markets could produce the worst results. 
===== PDF page index 460 =====
Chapter 26: Buying Options and Treasury Bills 421 
There are trade-offs involved as well. If, after purchasing the options, the mar­
ket experiences a substantial rally, that portion of the option purchase money that is 
devoted to put option purchases will be lost. Thus, the combination of both put and 
call purchases would do better in a down market than a strategy of buying only calls, 
but would do worse in an up market. In a broad sense, it makes sense to include some 
put purchases if one has the funds to diversify, since the frequency of market rallies 
is smaller than the combined frequency of market rallies and declines. The investor 
who owns both puts and calls will be able to profit from substantial moves in either 
direction, because the profitable options will be able to overcome the limited losses 
on the unprofitable ones. 
SUMMARY 
In summary, the T-bill/option strategy is attractive from several viewpoints. Its true 
advantage lies in the fact that it has predefined risk and does not have a limit on 
potential profits. Some theorists claim it is the best strategy available, if the options 
are "underpriced" when they are purchased. The strategy is also relatively simple to 
operate. It is not necessary to have a margin account or to compute collateral require­
ments for uncovered options; the strategy can be operated completely from a cash 
account. There are no spreads involved, nor is it necessary to worry about details such 
as early assignment (because there are no short options in this strategy). 
The investor who is going to employ this strategy, however, must not be delud­
ed into thinking that it is so simple that it does not take any work at all. The concepts 
and application of annualized risk management are very important to the strategy. So 
are the mechanics of option buying - particularly a disciplined, rational approach to 
the selection of which calls and/or puts to buy. Consequently, this strategy is suitable 
only for the investor who has both the time and the discipline to operate it correctly. 
===== PDF page index 461 =====
Arbitrage 
Arbitrage in the securities market often connotes that one is buying something in 
one marketplace and selling it in another marketplace, for a small profit with little 
or no risk. For example, one might buy XYZ at 55 in New York and sell it at 55¼ in 
Chicago. Arbitrage, especially option arbitrage, involves a far wider range of tactics 
than this simple example. Many of the option arbitrage tactics involve buying one 
side of an equivalent position and simultaneously selling the other side. Since there 
is a large number of equivalent strategies, many of which have been pointed out in 
earlier chapters, a full-time option arbitrageur is able to construct a rather large 
number of positions, most of which have little or no risk. The public customer can­
not generally operate arbitrage-like strategies because of the commission costs 
involved. Arbitrageurs are firm traders or floor traders who are trading through a 
seat on the appropriate securities exchange, and therefore have only minimal trans­
action costs. 
The public customer can benefit from understanding arbitrage techniques, even 
ifhe does not personally employ them. The arbitrageurs perform a useful function in 
the option marketplace, often making markets where a market might not otherwise 
exist (deeply in-the-money options, for example). This chapter is directed at the 
strategist who is actually going to be participating in arbitrage. This should not be 
confusing to the public customer, for he will better understand the arbitrage strate­
gies if he temporarily places himself in the arbitrageur's shoes. 
It is virtually impossible to perform pure arbitrage on dually listed options; that 
is, to buy an option on the CBOE and sell it on the American exchange in New York 
for a profit. Such discrepancies occur so infrequently and in such small size that an 
option arbitrageur could never hope to be fully employed in this type of simple arbi­
trage. Rather, the more complex forms of arbitrage described here are the ones on 
which he would normally concentrate. 
422 
===== PDF page index 462 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 423 
BASIC PUT AND CALL ARBITRAGE ("DISCOUNTING") 
The basic call and the basic put arbitrages are two of the simpler forms of option arbi­
trage. In these situations, the arbitrageur attempts to buy the option at a discount 
while simultaneously taking an opposite position in the underlying stock. He can then 
exercise his option immediately and make a profit equal to the amount of the discount. 
The basic call arbitrage is described first. This was also outlined in Chapter 1, 
under the section on anticipating exercise. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 58 and the XYZ July 50 call is trading at 7¾. The call is 
actually at a discount from parity of ¼ point. Discount options generally either are 
quite deeply in-the-money or have only a short time remaining until expiration, or 
both. The call arbitrage would be constructed by: 
1. buying the call at 7¾; 
2. selling the stock at 58; 
3. exercising the call to buy the stock at 50. 
The arbitrageur would make 8 points of profit from the stock, having sold it at 58 and 
bought it back at 50 via the option exercise. He loses the 7¾ points that he paid for 
the call option, but this still leaves him with an overall profit of¼ point. Since he is 
a member of the exchange, or is trading the seat of an exchange member, the arbi­
trageur pays only a small charge to transact the trades. 
In reality, the stock is not sold short per se, even though it is sold before it is 
bought. Rather, the position is designated, at the time of its inception, as an "irrevo­
cable exercise." The arbitrageur is promising to exercise the call. As a result, no 
uptick is required to sell the stock. 
The main goal in the call arbitrage is to be able to buy the call at a discount from 
the price at which the stock is sold. The differential is the profit potential of the arbi­
trage. The basic put arbitrage is quite similar to the call arbitrage. Again, the arbi­
trageur is looking to buy the put option at a discount from parity. The put arbitrage 
is completed with a stock purchase and option exercise. 
Example: XYZ is at 58 and the XYZ July 70 put is at 11 ¾. With the put at ¼ discount 
from parity, the arbitrageur might take the following action: 
1. Buy put at 11 ¾. 
2. Buy stock at 58. 
3. Exercise put to sell stock at 70. 
===== PDF page index 463 =====
424 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
The stock transaction is a 12-point profit, since the stock was bought at 58 and is sold 
at 70 via the put exercise. The cost of the put - 11 ¾ points - is lost, but the arbi­
trageur still makes ¼-point profit. Again, this profit is equal to the arrwunt of the dis­
count in the option when the position was established. Generally, the arbitrageur 
would exercise his put option immediately, because he would not want to tie up his 
capital to carry the long stock. An exception to this would be if the stock were about 
to go ex-dividend. Dividend arbitrage is discussed in the next section. 
The basic call and put arbitrages may exist at any time, although they will be 
more frequent when there is an abundance of deeply in-the-money options or when 
there is a very short time remaining until expiration. After market rallies, the call 
arbitrage may be easier to establish; after market declines, the put arbitrage will be 
easier to find. As an expiration date draws near, an option that is even slightly in-the­
money on the last day or two of trading could be a candidate for discount arbitrage. 
The reason that this is true is that public buying interest in the option will normally 
wane. The only public buyers would be those who are short and want to cover. Many 
covered writers will elect to let the stock be called away, so that will reduce even fur­
ther the buying potential of the public. This leaves it to the arbitrageurs to supply the 
buying interest. 
The arbitrageur obviously wants to establish these positions in as large a size as 
possible, since there is no risk in the position if it is established at a discount. Usually, 
there will be a larger market for the stock than there will be for the options, so the 
arbitrageur spends more of his time on the option position. However, there may be 
occasions when the option markets are larger than the corresponding stock quotes. 
When this happens, the arbitrageur has an alternative available to him: He might sell 
an in-the-money option at parity rather than take a stock position. 
Example: XYZ is at 58 and the XYZ July 50 call is at 7¾. These are the same figures 
as in the previous example. Furthermore, suppose that the trader is able to buy more 
options at 7¾ than he is able to sell stock at 58. If there were another in-the-money 
call that could be sold at parity, it could be used in place of the stock sale. For exam­
ple, if the XYZ July 40 call could be sold at 18 (parity), the arbitrage could still be 
established. Ifhe is assigned on the July 40 that he is short, he will then be short stock 
at a net price of 58 - the striking price of 40, plus the 18 points that were brought in 
from the sale of the July 40 call. Thus, the sale of the in-the-money call at parity is 
equivalent to shorting the stock for the arbitrage purpose. 
In a similar manner, an in-the-money put can be used in the basic put arbitrage. 
Example: With XYZ at 58 and the July 70 put at 11¾, the arbitrage could be estab­
lished. However, if the trader is having trouble buying enough stock at 58, he might 