
===== PDF page index 138 =====
O.,ter 3: Call Buying 
TABLE 3-5. 
Original and spread positions compared. 
Stock Price Long Call 
at Expiration Result 
25 -$300 
30 - 300 
33 - 300 
35 - 300 
38 0 
40 + 200 
45 + 700 
FIGURE 3-2. 
Companion: original call purchase vs. spread. 
§ 
~ +$200 
·5.. 
~ 
al 
tJ) 
.3 
0 
:1: 
e 
c.. -$300 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Spread 
Result 
-$300 
- 300 
0 
+ 200 
+ 200 
+ 200 
+ 200 
115 
With these prices, a 1-point debit would be required to roll down. That is, selling 2 
October 35 calls would bring in $300 ($150 each), but the cost of buying the October 
30 call is $400. Thus, the transaction would have to be done at a cost of $100, plus 
commissions. With these prices, the break-even point after rolling down would be 34, 
still well below the original break-even price of 38. The risk has now been increased 
by the additional 1 point spent to roll down. If XYZ should drop below 30 at October 
expiration, the investor would have a total loss of 4 points plus commissions. The 
maximum loss with the original long October 35 call was limited to 3 points plus a 
smaller amount of commissions. Finally, the maximum amount of money that the 
===== PDF page index 139 =====
116 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
spread could make is now $100, less commissions. The alternative in this example is 
not nearly as attractive as the previous one, but it might still be worthwhile for the 
call buyer to invoke such a spread if he feels that XYZ has limited rally potential up 
to October expiration. 
One should not automatically discard the use of this strategy merely because a 
debit is required to convert the long call to a spread. Note that to "average down" by 
buying an additional October 35 call at 1 ½ would require an additional investment 
of $150. This is more than the $100 required to convert into the spread position in 
the immediately preceding example. The break-even point on the position that was 
"averaged down" would be over 37 at expiration, whereas the break-even point on the 
spread is 34. Admittedly, the averaged-down position has much more profit potential 
than the spread does, but the conversion to the spread is less expensive than "aver­
aging down" and also provides a lower break-even price. 
In summary, then, if the call buyer finds himself with an unrealized loss because 
the stock has declined, and yet is unwilling to sell, he may be able to improve his 
chances of breaking even by "rolling down" into a spread. That is, he would sell 2 of 
the calls that he is currently long - the one that he owns plus another one - and 
simultaneously buy one call at the next lower striking price. If this transaction of sell­
ing 2 calls and buying 1 call can be done for approximately even money, it could def­
initely be to the buyer's benefit to implement this strategy, because the break-even 
point would be lowered considerably and the buyer would have a much better 
chance of getting out even or making a small profit should the underlying stock have 
a small rebound. 
Creating a Calendar Spread. A different type of defensive spread strategy 
is sometimes used by the call buyer who finds that the underlying stock has declined. 
In this strategy, the holder of an intermediate- or long-term call sells a near-term call, 
with the same striking price as the call he already owns. This creates what is known 
as a calendar spread. The idea behind doing this is that if the short-term call expires 
worthless, the overall cost of the long call will be reduced to the buyer. Then, if the 
stock should rally, the call buyer has a better chance of making a profit. 
Example: Suppose that an investor bought an XYZ October 35 call for 3 points some­
time in April. By June the stock has fallen to 32, and it appears that the stock might 
remain depressed for a while longer. The holder of the October 35 call might con­
sider selling a July 35 call, perhaps for a price of 1 point. Should XYZ remain below 
35 until July expiration, the short call would expire worthless, earning a small, 1-point 
profit. The investor would still own the October 35 call and would then hope for a 
rally by XYZ before October in order to make profits on that call. Even if XYZ does 
===== PDF page index 140 =====
Chpter 3: Call Buying 117 
not rally by October, he has decreased his overall loss by the amount received for the 
sale of the July 35 call. 
This strategy is not as attractive to use as the previous one. If XYZ should rally 
before July expiration, the investor might find himself with two losing positions. For 
example, suppose that XYZ rallied back to 36 in the next week. His short call that he 
sold for 1 point would be selling for something more than that, so he would have an 
unrealized loss on the short July 35. In addition, the October 35 would probably not 
have appreciated back to its original price of 3, and he would therefore have an unre­
alized loss on that side of the spread as well. 
Consequently, this strategy should be used with great caution, for if the under­
lying stock rallies quickly before the near-term expiration, the spread could be at a 
loss on both sides. Note that in the former spread strategy, this could not happen. 
Even if XYZ rallied quickly, some profit would be made on the rebound. 
A FURTHER COMMENT ON SPREADS 
Anyone not familiar with the margin requirements for spreads, under both the 
exchange margin rules and the rules of the brokerage firm he is dealing with, should 
not attempt to utilize a spread transaction. Later chapters on spreads outline the 
more common requirements for spread transactions. In general, one must have a 
margin account to establish a spread and must have a minimum amount of equity in 
the account. Thus, the call buyer who operates in a cash account cannot necessarily 
use these spread strategies. To do so might incur a margin call and possible restric­
tion of one's trading account. Therefore, check on specific requirements before uti­
lizing a spread strategy. Do not assume that a long call can automatically be "rolled" 
into any sort of spread. 
===== PDF page index 141 =====
Other Call Buying Strategies 
In this chapter, two additional strategies that utilize the purchase of call options are 
described. Both of these strategies involve buying calls against the short sale of the 
underlying stock. When listed puts are traded on the underlying stock, these strate­
gies are often less effective than when they are implemented with the use of put 
options. However, the concept is important, and sometimes these strategies are more 
viable in markets where calls are ve:iy liquid but puts are not. These strategies are 
generally known as "synthetic" strategies. 
THE PROTECTED SHORT SALE (OR SYNTHETIC PUT) 
Purchasing a call at the same time that one is short the underlying stock is a means 
of limiting the risk of the short sale to a fixed amount. Since the risk is theoretically 
unlimited in a short sale, many investors are reluctant to use the strategy. Even for 
those investors who do sell stock short, it can be rather upsetting if the stock rises in 
price. One may be forced into an emotional - and perhaps incorrect - decision to 
cover the short sale in order to relieve the psychological pressure. By owning a call 
at the same time he is short, the investor limits the risk to a fixed and generally small 
amount. 
Example: An investor sells XYZ short at 40 and simultaneously purchases an XYZ 
July 40 call for 3 points. If XYZ falls in price, the short seller will make his profit on 
the short sale, less the 3 points paid for the call, which will expire worthless. Thus, by 
buying the call for protection, a small amount of profit potential is sacrificed. 
However, the advantage of owning the call is demonstrated when the results are 
examined for a stock rise. IfXYZ should rise to any price above 40 by July expiration, 
118 
===== PDF page index 142 =====
Cl,apter 4: Other Call Buying Strategies 119 
the short seller can cover his short by exercising the long call and buying stock at 40. 
Thus, the maximum risk that the short seller can incur in this example is the 3 points 
paid for the call. Table 4-1 and Figure 4-1 depict the results at expiration from uti­
lizing this strategy. Commissions are not included. Note that the break-even point is 
37 in this example. That is, if the stock drops 3 points, the protected short sale posi­
tion will break even because of the 3-point loss on the call. The short seller who did 
not spend the extra money for the long call would, of course, have a 3-point profit at 
37. To the upside, however, the protected short sale outperforms a regular short sale 
if the stock climbs anywhere above 43. At 43, both types of short sales have $300 loss­
es. But above that level, the loss would continue to grow for a regular short sale, while 
it is fixed for the short seller who also bought a call. In either case, the short seller's 
risk is increased slightly by the fact that he is obligated to pay out the dividends on 
the underlying stock, if any are declared. 
A simple formula is available for determining the maximum amount of risk 
when one protects a short sale by buying a call option: 
Risk = Striking price of purchased call + Call price - Stock price 
Depending on how much risk the short seller is willing to absorb, he might want to 
buy an out-of-the-money call as protection rather than an at-the-money call, as was 
shown in the example above. A smaller dollar amount is spent for the protection 
when one buys an out-of-the-money call, so that the short seller does not give away 
as much of his profit potential. However, his risk is larger because the call does not 
start its protective qualities until the stock goes above the striking price. 
Example: With XYZ at 40, the short seller of XYZ buys the July 45 call at ½ for pro­
tection. His maximum possible loss, if XYZ is above 45 at July expiration, would be 
TABLE 4-1. 
Results at expiration-protected short sale. 
XYZ Price at Profit Call Price at Profit Total 
Expiration on XYZ Expiration on Call Profit 
20 +$2,000 0 -$ 300 +$1,700 
30 + 1,000 0 - 300 + 700 
37 + 300 0 - 300 0 
40 0 0 - 300 300 
50 - 1,000 10 + 700 300 
60 - 2,000 20 + 1,700 300 
===== PDF page index 143 =====
120 
FIGURE 4-1. 
Protected short sale. 
C: 
0 .:; 
~ 
'a.. X 
UJ 
1o +$0 en en 
0 
...J 
0 
-e 
0.-$300 
40' 
', 
Stock Price at Expiration 
' 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
43 
', ', ' ', ' ', 
Short ', 
' Sale 'll 
5½ points - the five points between the current stock price of 40 and the striking 
price of 45, plus the amount paid for the call. On the other hand, if XYZ declines, the 
protected short seller will make nearly as much as the short seller who did not pro­
tect, since he only spent ½ point for the long call. 
If one buys an in-the-nwney call as protection for the short sale, his risk will be 
quite minimal. However, his profit potential will be severely limited. As an example, 
with XYZ at 40, if one had purchased a July 35 call at 5½, his risk would be limited 
to½ point anywhere above 35 at July expiration. Unfortunately, he would not realize 
any profit on the position until the stock went below 34½, a drop of 5½ points. This 
is too much protection, for it limits the profit so severely that there is only a small 
hope of making a profit. 
Generally, it is best to buy a call that is at-the-nwney or only slightly out-of the­
money as the protection for the short sale. It is not of much use to buy a deeply out­
of-the-money call as protection, since it does very little to moderate risk unless the 
stock climbs quite dramatically. Normally, one would cover a short sale before it went 
heavily against him. Thus, the money spent for such a deeply out-of-the-money call 
is wasted. However, if one wants to give a short sale plenty of room to "work" and 
===== PDF page index 144 =====
Cl,opter 4: Other Call Buying Strategies 121 
feels ve:ry certain that his bearish view of the stock is the correct view, he might then 
buy a fairly deep out-of-the-money call just as disaster protection, in case the stock 
suddenly bolted upward in price (if it received a takeover bid, for example). 
MARGIN REQUIREMENTS 
The newest margin rules now allow one to receive favorable margin treatment when 
a short sale of stock is protected by a long call option. The margin required is the 
lower of (1) 10% of the call's striking price plus any out-of-the-money amount, or (2) 
30% of the current short stock's market value. The position will be marked to market 
daily, and most brokers will require that the short sale be margined at "normal" rates 
if the stock is below the strike price. 
Example: Suppose the following prices exist: 
XYZ Common stock: 47 
Oct 40 call: 8 
Oct 50 call: 3 
Oct 60 call: 1 
Suppose that one is considering a short sale of 100 shares of XYZ at 47 and the 
purchase of one of the calls as protection. Here are the margin requirements for the 
various strike prices. (Note that the option price, per se, is not part of the margin 
requirement, but all options must be paid for in full, initially). 
Position 
Short XYZ, long Oct 40 call 
Short XYZ, long Oct 50 call 
Short XYZ, long Oct 60 call 
l 0% strike + out-of-the-money 
400 + 0 = 400* 
500 + 300 = 800* 
600 + 1,300 = 1,900 
30% stock price 
1,410 
1,410 
1,41 0* 
*Since the margin requirement is the lower of the two figures, the items marked with an asterisk in 
this table are the margin requirements. 
Again, remember that the long call would have to be paid for in full, and that most 
brokers impose a maintenance requirement of at least the value of the short sale itself 
as long as the stock is below the strike price of the long call, in addition to the above 
requirements. 
===== PDF page index 145 =====
122 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
There is little that the protected short seller needs to perform in the way of follow­
up action in this strategy, other than closing out the position. If the underlying stock 
moves down quickly and it appears that it might rebound, the short sale could be cov­
ered without selling the long call. In this manner, one could potentially profit on the 
call side as well if the stock came back above the original striking price. If the under­
lying stock rises in price, a similar strategy of taking off only the profitable call side 
of the transaction is not recommended. That is, if XYZ climbed from 40 to 50 and the 
July 40 call also rose from 3 to 10, it is not advisable to take the 7-point profit in the 
call, hoping for a drop in the stock price. The reason for this is that one is entering 
into a highly risk-oriented situation by removing his protection when the call is in­
the-money. Thus, when the stock drops, it is all right - perhaps even desirable - to 
take the profit, because there is little or no additional risk if the stock continues to 
drop. However, when the stock rises, it is not an equivalent situation. In that case, if 
the short seller sells his call for a profit and the stock subsequently rises even further, 
large losses could result. 
It may often be advisable to close the position if the call is at or near parity, 
in-the-money, by exercising the call. In most strategies, the option holder has no 
advantage in exercising the call because of the large dollar difference between 
stock commissions and option commissions. However, in the protected short sale 
strategy, the short seller is eventually going to have to cover the short stock in any 
case and incur the stock commission by so doing. It may be to his advantage to 
exercise the call and buy his stock at the striking price, thereby buying stock at a 
lower price and perhaps paying a slightly lower commission amount. 
Example: XYZ rises to 50 from the original short sale price of 40, and the XYZ July 
40 call is selling at 10 somewhere close to expiration. The position could be liquidat­
ed by either (1) buying the stock back at 50 and selling the call at 10, or (2) exercis­
ing the call to buy stock at 40. In the first case, one would pay a stock commission at 
a price of $50 per share plus an option commission on a $10 option. In the second 
case, the only commission would be a stock commission at the price of $40 per share. 
Since both actions accomplish the same end result - closing the position entirely for 
40 points plus commissions - clearly the second choice is less costly and therefore 
more desirable. Of course, if the call has time value premium in it of an amount 
greater than the commission savings, the first alternative should be used. 
===== PDF page index 146 =====
Orapter 4: Other Call Buying Strategies 123 
THE REVERSE HEDGE (SIMULATED STRADDLE) 
There is another strategy involving the purchase of long calls against the short sale of 
stock. In this strategy, one purchases calls on more shares than he has sold short. The 
strategist can profit if the underlying stock rises far enough or falls far enough dur­
ing the life of the calls. This strategy is generally referred to as a reverse hedge or sim­
ulated straddle. On stocks for which listed puts are traded, this strategy is outmoded; 
the same results can be better achieved by buying a straddle (a call and a put). 
Hence, the name "simulated straddle" is applied to the reverse hedge strategy. 
This strategy has limited loss potential, usually amounting to a moderate per­
centage of the initial investment, and theoretically unlimited profit potential. When 
properly selected (selection criteria are described in great detail in Chapter 36, 
which deals with volatility trading), the percentage of success can be quite high in 
straddle or synthetic straddle buying. These features make this an attractive strategy, 
especially when call premiums are low in comparison to the volatility of underlying 
stock. 
Example: XYZ is at 40 and an investor believes that the stock has the potential to 
move by a relatively large distance, but he is not sure of the direction the stock will 
take. This investor could short XYZ at 40 and buy 2 XYZ July 40 calls at 3 each to set 
up a reverse hedge. If XYZ moves up by a large distance, he will incur a loss on his 
short stock, but the fact that he owns two calls means that the call profits will outdis­
tance the stock loss. If, on the other hand, XYZ drops far enough, the short sale prof­
it will be larger than the loss on the calls, which is limited to 6 points. Table 4-2 and 
Figure 4-2 show the possible outcomes for various stock prices at July expiration. If 
XYZ falls, the stock profits on the short sale will accumulate, but the loss on the two 
calls is limited to $600 (3 points each) so that, below 34, the reverse hedge can make 
ever-increasing profits. To the upside, even though the short sale is incurring losses, 
the call profits grow faster because there are two long calls. For example, at 60 at 
expiration, there will be a 20-point ($2,000) loss on the short stock, but each XYZ July 
40 call will be worth 20 points with the stock at 60. Thus, the two calls are worth 
$4,000, representing a profit of $3,400 over the initial cost of $600 for the calls. 
Table 4-2 and Figure 4-2 illustrate another important point: The maximum loss 
would occur if the stock were exactly at the striking price at expiration of the calls. This 
maximum loss would occur if XYZ were at 40 at expiration and would amount to $600. 
In actual practice, since the short seller must pay out any dividends paid by the under­
lying stock, the risk in this strategy is increased by the amount of such dividends. 
===== PDF page index 147 =====
124 
TABLE 4-2. 
Reverse hedge at July expiration. 
XYZ Price at Stock 
Expiration Profit 
20 +$2,000 
25 + 1,500 
30 + 1,000 
34 + 600 
40 0 
46 600 
50 - 1,000 
55 - 1,500 
60 - 2,000 
FIGURE 4-2. 
Reverse hedge {simulated straddle). 
C: 
0 
~ 
! 
co 
(/) 
(/) 
.3 
~-$600 
e a. 
Profit on 
2 Calls 
-$ 600 
600 
600 
600 
600 
+ 600 
+ 1,400 
+ 2,400 
+ 3,400 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Total 
Profit 
+$ l ,400 
+ 900 
+ 400 
0 
600 
0 
+ 400 
+ 900 
+ 1,400 
The net margin required for this strategy is 50% of the underlying stock plus 
the full purchase price of the calls. In the example above, this would be an initial 
investment of $2,000 (50% of the stock price) plus $600 for the calls, or $2,600 total 
plus commissions. The short sale is marked to market, so the collateral requirement 
would grow if the stock rose. Since the maximum risk, before commissions, is $600, 
this means that the net percentage risk in this transaction is $600/$2,600, about 23%. 