
===== PDF page index 474 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 435 
account. For example, suppose that an arbitrageur has $5 million in 3-month rever­
sals at an effective rate of 10%. If he can buy $5 million worth of 3-month Certificates 
of Deposit with a rate of 11 ½%, then he would lock in a profit of 1 ½% on his $5 mil­
lion. This method of using paper to hedge rate fluctuations is not practiced by all 
arbitrageurs; some think it is not worth it. They believe that by leaving the credit bal­
ances to fluctuate at prevailing rates, they can make more if rates go up, and that will 
cushion the effect when rates decline. 
The third risk of reversal arbitrage is reception of an early assignment on the 
short puts. This forces the arbitrageur to buy stock and incur a debit. Thus, the posi­
tion does not earn as much interest as was originally assumed. If the assignment is 
received early enough in the life of the reversal (recall that in-the-money puts can 
be assigned very far in advance of expiration), the reversal could actually incur an 
overall loss. Such early assignments normally occur during bearish markets. The only 
advantage of this early assignment is that one is left with unhedged long calls; these 
calls are well out-of-the-money and normally quite low-priced (¼ or less). If the 
market should reverse and turn bullish before the expiration of the calls, the arbi­
trageur may make money on them. There is no way to hedge completely against a 
market decline, but it does help if the arbitrageur tries to establish reversals with the 
call in-the-money and the put out-of-the-money. That, plus demanding a better 
overall return for reversals near the strike, should help cushion the effects of the 
bear market. 
The final risk is the most common one, that of the stock closing exactly at the 
strike at expiration. This presents the arbitrageur with a decision to make regarding 
exercise of his long calls. Since the stock is exactly at the strike, he is not sure whether 
he will be assigned on his short puts at expiration. The outcome is that he may end 
up with an unhedged stock position on Monday morning after expiration. If the stock 
should open on a gap, he could have a substantial loss that wipes out the profits of 
many reversals. This risk of stock closing at the strike may seem minute, but it is not. 
In the absence of any real buying or selling in the stock on expiration day, the process 
of discounting will force a stock that is near the strike virtually right onto the strike. 
Once it is near the strike, this risk materializes. 
There are two basic scenarios that could occur to produce this unhedged stock 
position. First, suppose one decides that he will not get put and he exercises his calls. 
However, he was wrong and he does get put. He has bought double the amount of 
stock - once via call exercise and again via put assignment. Thus, he will be long on 
Monday morning. The other scenario produces the opposite effect. Suppose one 
decides that he will get put and he decides not to exercise his calls. If he is wrong in 
this case, he does not buy any stock - he didn't exercise nor did he get put. 
Consequently, he will be short stock on Monday morning. 
===== PDF page index 475 =====
436 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
If one is truly undecided about whether he will be assigned on his short puts, 
he might look at several clues. First, has any late news come out on Friday evening 
that might affect the market's opening or the stock's opening on Monday morning? If 
so, that should be factored into the decision regarding exercising the calls. Another 
clue arises from the price at which the stock was trading during the Friday expiration 
day, prior to the close. If the stock was below the strike for most of the day before 
closing at the strike, then there is a greater chance that the puts will be assigned. This 
is so because other arbitrageurs (discounters) have probably bought puts and bought 
stock during the day and will exercise to clean out their positions. 
If there is still doubt, it may be wisest to exercise only half of the calls, hoping 
for a partial assignment on the puts (always a possibility). This halfway measure will 
normally result in some sort of unhedged stock position on Monday morning, but it 
will be smaller than the maximum exposure by at least half. 
Another approach that the arbitrageur can take if the stock is near the strike of 
the reversal during the late trading of the options' life - during the last few days - is 
to roll the reversal to a later expiration or, failing that, to roll to another strike in the 
same expiration. First, let us consider rolling to another expiration. The arbitrageur 
knows the dollar price that equals his effective rate for a 3-month reversal. If the cur­
rent options can be closed out and new options opened at the next expiration for at 
least the effective rate, then the reversal should be rolled. This is not a likely event, 
mostly due to the fact that the spread between the bid and asked prices on four sep­
arate options makes it difficult to attain the desired price. Note: This entire four-way 
order can be entered as a spread order; it is not necessary to attempt to "leg" the 
spread. 
The second action - rolling to another strike in the same expiration month -
may be more available. Suppose that one has the July 45 reversal in place (long July 
45 call and short July 45 put). If the underlying stock is near 45, he might place an 
order to the exchange floor as a three-way spread: Sell the July 45 call (closing), buy 
the July 45 put (closing), and sell the July 40 call ( opening) for a net credit of 5 points. 
This action costs the arbitrageur nothing except a small transaction charge, since he 
is receiving a 5-point credit for moving the strike by 5 points. Once this is accom­
plished, he will have moved the strike approximately 5 points away and will thus have 
avoided the problem of the stock closing at the strike. 
Overall, these four risks are significant, and reversal arbitrageurs should take 
care that they do not fall prey to them. The careless arbitrageur uses effective rates 
too close to current market rates, establishes reversals with puts in-the-money, and 
routinely accepts the risk of acquiring an unhedged stock position on the morning 
after expiration. He will probably sustain a large loss at some time. Since many rever­
sal arbitrageurs work with small capital and/or have convinced their backers that it is 
===== PDF page index 476 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 437 
a riskless strategy, such a loss may have the effect of putting them out of business. 
That is an unnecessary risk to take. There are countermeasures, as described above, 
that can reduce the effects of the four risks. 
Let us consider the risks for conversion traders more briefly. The risk of stock 
closing near the strike is just as bad for the conversion as it is for the reversal. The 
same techniques for handling those risks apply equally well to conversions as to 
reversals. The other risks are similar to reversal risks, but there are slight nuances. 
The conversion arbitrage suffers if there is a dividend cut. There is little the 
arbitrageur can do to predict this except to be aware of the fundamentals of the com­
pany before entering into the conversion. Alternatively, he might avoid conversions 
in which the dividend makes up a major part of the profit of the arbitrage. 
Another risk occurs if there is an early assignment on the calls before the ex-div­
idend date and the dividend is not received. Moreover, an early assignment leaves the 
arbitrageur with long puts, albeit fractional ones since they are surely deeply out-of­
the-money. Again, the policy of establishing conversions in which the dividend is not 
a major factor would help to ease the consequences of early assignment. 
The final risk is that interest rates increase during the time the conversion is in 
place. This makes the carrying costs larger than anticipated and might cause a loss. 
The best way to hedge this initially is to allow a margin for error. Thus, if the pre­
vailing interest rate is 12%, one might only establish reversals that would break even 
if rates rose to 14%. If rates do not rise that far on average, a profit will result. The 
arbitrageur can attempt to hedge this risk by shorting interest-bearing paper that 
matures at approximately the same time as the conversions. For example, if one has 
$5 million worth of 3-month conversions established at an effective rate of 14% and 
he shorts 3-month paper at 12½%, he locks in a profit of 1 ½%. This is not common 
practice for conversion arbitrageurs, but it does hedge the effect of rising interest 
rates. 
SUMMARY OF CONVERSION ARBITRAGE 
The practice of conversion and reversal arbitrage in the listed option markets helps 
to keep put and call prices in line. If arbitrageurs are active in a particular option, the 
prices of the put and call will relate to the stock price in line with the formulae given 
earlier. Note that this is also a valid reason why puts tend to sell at a lower price than 
calls do. The cost of money is the determining factor in the difference between put 
and call prices. In essence, the "cost" (although it may sometimes be a credit) is sub­
tracted from the theoretical put price. Refer again to the formula given above for the 
profit potential of a conversion. Assume that things are in perfect alignment. Then 
the formula would read: 
===== PDF page index 477 =====
438 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
Put price = Striking price + Call price - Stock price - Fixed cost 
Furthermore, if the stock is at the striking price, the formula reduces to: 
Put price = Call price - Fixed cost 
So, whenever the fixed cost, which is equal to the carrying charge less the dividends, 
is greater than zero (and it usually is), the put will sell for less than the call if a stock 
is at the striking price. Only in the case of a large-dividend-paying stock, when the 
fixed cost becomes negative (that is, it is not a cost, but a credit), does the reverse 
hold true. This is supportive evidence for statements made earlier that at-the-money 
calls sell for more than at-the-money puts, all other things being equal. The reader 
can see quite clearly that it has nothing to do with supply and demand for the puts 
and calls, a fallacy that is sometimes proffered. This same sort of analysis can be used 
to prove the broader statement that calls have a greater time value premium than 
puts do, except in the case of a large-dividend-paying stock. 
One final word of advice should be offered to the public customer. He may 
sometimes be able to find conversions or reversals, by using the simplistic formula, 
that appear to have profit potentials that exceed commission costs. Such positions do 
exist from time to time, but the rate of return to the public customer will almost 
assuredly be less than the short-term cost of money. If it were not, arbitrageurs would 
be onto the position very quickly. The public option trader may not actually be think­
ing in terms of comparing the profit potential of a position with what he could get by 
placing the money into a bank, but he must do so to convince himself that he cannot 
feasibly attempt conversion or reversal arbitrages. 
THE "INTEREST PLAY" 
In the preceding discussion of reversal arbitrage, it is apparent that a substantial por­
tion of the arbitrageur's profits may be due to the interest earned on the credit of the 
position. Another type of position is used by many arbitrageurs to take advantage of 
this interest earned. The arbitrageur sells the underlying stock short and simultane­
ously buys an in-the-money call that is trading slightly over parity. The actual amount 
over parity that the arbitrageur can afford to pay for the call is determined by the 
interest that he will earn from his short sale and the dividend payout before expira­
tion. He does not use a put in this type of position. In fact, this "interest play" strat­
egy is merely a reversal arbitrage without the short put. This slight variation has a 
residual benefit for the arbitrageur: If the underlying stock should drop dramatically 
in price, he could make large profits because he is short the underlying stock. In any 
case, he will make his interest credit less the amount of time value premium paid for 
the call less any dividends lost. 
===== PDF page index 478 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 439 
Example 1: XYZ is sold short at 60, and a January 50 call is bought for 10¼ points. 
Assume that the prevailing interest rate is 1 % per month and that the position is 
established one month prior to expiration. XYZ pays no dividend. The total credit 
brought in from the trades is $4,975, so the arbitrageur will earn $49.75 in interest 
over the course of 1 month. If the stock is above 50 at expiration, he will exercise his 
call to buy stock at 50 and close the position. His loss on the security trades will be 
$25 the amount of time value premium paid for the call option. (He makes 10 
points by selling stock at 60 and buying at 50, but loses 10¼ points on the exercised 
call.) His overall profit is thus $24.75. 
Example 2: A real-life example may point out the effect of interest rates even more 
dramatically. In early 1979, IBM April 240 calls with about six weeks of life remain­
ing were over 60 points in-the-money. IBM was not going to be ex-dividend in that 
time. Normally, such a deeply in-the-money option would be trading at parity or even 
a discount when the time remaining to expiration is so short. However, these calls 
were trading 3½ points over parity because of the prevailing high interest rates at the 
time. IBM was at 300, the April 240 calls were trading at 63½, and the prevailing 
interest rate was approximately 1 % per month. The credit from selling the stock and 
buying the call was $23,700, so the arbitrageur earned $365.50 in interest for 1 ½ 
months, and lost $350 - the 3½ points of time value premium that he paid for the 
call. This still left enough room for a profit. 
In Chapter 1, it was stated that interest rates affect option prices. The above 
examples of the "interest play" strategy quite clearly show why. As interest rates rise, 
the arbitrageur can afford to pay more for the long call in this strategy, thus causing 
the call price to increase in times of high interest rates. If call prices are higher, so 
will put prices be, as the relationships necessary for conversion and reversal arbitrage 
are preserved. Similarly, if interest rates decline, the arbitrageur will make lower 
bids, and call and put prices will be lower. They are active enough to give truth to the 
theory that option prices are directly related to interest rates. 
THE BOX SPREAD 
An arbitrage consists of simultaneously buying and selling the same security or equiv­
alent securities at different prices. For example, the reversal consists of selling a put 
and simultaneously shorting stock and buying a call. The reader will recall that the 
short stock/long call position was called a synthetic put. That is, shorting the stock 
and buying a call is equivalent to buying a put. The reversal arbitrage therefore con­
sists of selling a (listed) put and simultaneously buying a (synthetic) put. In a similar 
===== PDF page index 479 =====
440 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
manner, the conversion is merely the purchase of a (listed) put and the simultaneous 
sale of a (synthetic) put. Many equivalent strategies can be combined for arbitrage 
purposes. One of the more common ones is the box spread. 
Recall that it was shown that a bull spread or a bear spread could be construct­
ed with either puts or calls. Thus, if one were to simultaneously buy a (call) bull 
spread and buy a (put) bear spread, he could have an arbitrage. In essence, he is 
merely buying and selling equivalent spreads. If the price differentials work out cor­
rectly, a risk-free arbitrage may be possible. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 55 
XYZ January 50 call, 7 
XYZ January 50 put, 1 
XYZ January 60 call, 2 
XYZ January 60 put, 5½ 
The arbitrageur could establish the box spread in this example by executing the 
following transactions: 
Buy a call bull spread: 
Buy XYZ January 50 call 
Sell XYZ January 60 call 
Net call cost 
Buy a put bear spread: 
Buy XYZ January 60 put 
Sell XYZ January 50 put 
Net put cost 
Total cost of position 
7 debit 
2 credit 
51/2 debit 
1 credit 
5 debit 
No matter where XYZ is at January expiration, this position will be worth 10 points. 
The arbitrageur has locked in a risk-free profit of½ point, since he "bought" the box 
spread for 9½ points and will be able to "sell" it for 10 points at expiration. To verify 
this, evaluate the position at expiration, first with XYZ above 60, then with XYZ 
between 50 and 60, and finally with XYZ below 50. If XYZ is above 60 at expiration, 
the puts will expire worthless and the call bull spread will be at its maximum poten­
tial of 10 points, the difference between the striking prices. Thus, the position can be 
liquidated for 10 points if XYZ is above 60 at expiration. Now assume that XYZ is 
===== PDF page index 480 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 441 
between 50 and 60 at expiration. In that case, the out-of-the-money, written options 
would expire worthless-the January 60 call and the January 50 put. This would leave 
a long, in-the-money combination consisting of a January 50 call and a January 60 
put. These two options must have a total value of 10 points at expiration with XYZ 
between 50 and 60. (For example, the arbitrageur could exercise his call to buy stock 
at 50 and exercise his put to sell stock at 60.) Finally, assume that XYZ is below 50 at 
expiration. The calls would expire worthless if that were true, but the remaining put 
spread- actually a bear spread in the puts -would be at its maximum potential of 10 
points. Again, the box spread could be liquidated for 10 points. 
The arbitrageur must pay a cost to carry the position, however. In the prior 
example, if interest rates were 6% and he had to hold the box for 3 months, it would 
cost him an additional 14 cents (.06 x 9½ x 3112). This still leaves room for a profit. 
In essence, a bull spread ( using calls) was purchased while a bear spread ( using 
puts) was bought. The box spread was described in these terms only to illustrate the 
fact that the arbitrageur is buying and selling equivalent positions. The arbitrageur 
who is utilizing the box spread should not think in terms of bull or bear spread, how­
ever. Rather, he should be concerned with "buying" the entire box spread at a cost of 
less than the differential between the two striking prices. By "buying" the box spread, 
it is meant that both the call spread portion and the put spread portion are debit 
spreads. Whenever the arbitrageur observes that a call spread and a put spread using 
the same strikes and that are both debit spreads can be bought for less than the dif­
ference in the strikes plus carrying costs, he should execute the arbitrage. 
Obviously, there is a companion strategy to the one just described. It might 
sometimes be possible for the arbitrageur to "sell" both spreads. That is, he would 
establish a credit call spread and a credit put spread, using the same strikes. If this 
credit were greater than the difference in the striking prices, a risk-free profit would 
be locked in. 
Example: Assume that a different set of prices exists: 
XYZ common, 75 
XYZ April 70 call, 8½ 
XYZ April 70 put, 1 
XYZ April 80 call, 3 
XYZ April 80 put, 6 
By executing the following transactions, the box spread could be "sold": 
===== PDF page index 481 =====
442 
Sell a call (bear) spread: 
Buy April 80 call 
Sell April 70 call 
Net credit on calls 
Sell a put (bull) spread: 
Buy April 70 put 
Sell April 80 put 
Net credit on puts 
Total credit of position 
3 debit 
81/2 credit 
1 debit 
6 credit 
Part IV: Additional Considerations 
5 credit 
101/2 credit 
In this case, no matter where XYZ is at expiration, the position can be bought back 
for 10 points. This means that the arbitrageur has locked in risk-free profit of¼ 
point. To verify this statement, first assume that XYZ is above 80 at April expiration. 
The puts will expire worthless, and the call spread will have widened to 10 points -
the cost to buy it back. Alternatively, if XYZ were between 70 and 80 at April expira­
tion, the long, out-of-the-money options would expire worthless and the in-the­
money combination would cost 10 points to buy back. (For example, the arbitrageur 
could let himself be put at 80, buying stock there, and called at 70, selling the stock 
there - a net "cost" to liquidate of 10 points.) Finally, if XYZ were below 70 at expi­
ration, the calls would expire worthless and the put spread would have widened to 10 
points. It could then be closed out at a cost of 10 points. In each case, the arbitrageur 
is able to liquidate the box spread by buying it back at 10. 
In this sale of a box spread, he would earn interest on the credit received while 
he holds the position. 
There is an additional factor in the profitability of the box spread. Since the sale 
of a box generates a credit, the arbitrageur who sells a box will earn a small amount 
of money from that sale. Conversely, the purchaser of a box spread will have a charge 
for carrying cost. Since profit margins may be small in a box arbitrage, these carrying 
costs can have a definite effect. As a result, boxes may actually be sold for 5 points, 
even though the striking prices are 5 points apart, and the arbitrageur can still make 
money because of the interest earned. 
These box spreads are not easy to find. If one does appear, the act of doing the 
arbitrage will soon make the arbitrage impossible. In fact, this is true of any type of 
arbitrage; it cannot be executed indefinitely because the mere act of arbitraging will 
force the prices back into line. Occasionally, the arbitrageur will be able to find the 
option quotes to his liking, especially in volatile markets, and can establish a risk-free 
===== PDF page index 482 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 443 
arbitrage with the box spread. It can be evaluated at a glance. Only two questions 
need to be answered: 
1. If one were to establish a debit call spread and a debit put spread, using the same 
strikes, would the total cost be less than the difference in the striking prices plus 
carrying costs? If the answer is yes, an arbitrage exists. 
2. Alternatively, if one were to sell both spreads - establishing a credit call spread 
and a credit put spread - would the total credit received plus interest earned be 
greater than the difference in the striking prices? If the answer is yes, an arbi­
trage exists. 
There are some risks to box arbitrage. Many of them are the same as those risks 
faced by the arbitrageur doing conversions or reversals. First, there is risk that the 
stock might close at either of the two strikes. This presents the arbitrageur with the 
same dilemma regarding whether or not to exercise his long options, since he is not 
sure whether he will be assigned. Additionally, early assignment may change the prof­
itability: Assignment of a short put will incur large carrying costs on the resulting long 
stock; assignment of a short call will inevitably come just before an ex-dividend date, 
costing the arbitrageur the amount of the dividend. 
There are not many opportunities to actually transact box arbitrage, but the fact 
that such arbitrage exists can help to keep markets in line. For example, if an under­
lying stock begins to move quickly and order flow increases dramatically, the special­
ist or market-markers in that stock's options may be so inundated with orders that 
they cannot be sure that their markets are correct. They can use the principles of box 
arbitrage to keep prices in line. The most active options would be the ones at strikes 
nearest to the current stock price. The specialist can quickly add up the markets of 
the call and put at the nearest strike above the stock price and add to that the mar­
kets of the options at the strike just below. The sum of the four should add up to a 
price that surrounds the difference in the strikes. If the strikes are 5 points apart, 
then the sum of the four markets should be something like 4½ bid, 5½ asked. If, 
instead, the four markets add up to a price that allows box arbitrage to be established, 
then the specialist will adjust his markets. 
VARIATIONS ON EQUIVALENCE ARBITRAGE 
Other variations of arbitrage on equivalent positions are possible, although they are 
relatively complicated and probably not worth the arbitrageur's time to analyze. For 
example, one could buy a butterfly spread with calls and simultaneously sell a but­
terfly spread using puts. A listed straddle could be sold and a synthetic straddle 
===== PDF page index 483 =====
444 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
could be bought - short stock and long 2 calls. Inversely, a listed straddle could be 
bought against a ratio write - long stock and short 2 calls. The only time the arbi­
trageur should even consider anything like this is when there are more sizable mar­
kets in certain of the puts and calls than there are in others. If this were the case, he 
might be able to take an ordinary box spread, conversion, or reversal and add to it, 
keeping the arbitrage intact by ensuring that he is, in fact, buying and selling equiv­
alent positions. 
THE EFFECTS OF ARBITRAGE 
The arbitrage process serves a useful purpose in the listed options market, because it 
may provide a secondary market where one might not otherwise exist. Normally, 
public interest in an in-the-money option dwindles as the option becomes deeply in­
the-money or when the time remaining until expiration is very short. There would be 
few public buyers of these options. In fact, public selling pressure might increase, 
because the public would rather liquidate in-the-money options held long than exer­
cise them. The few public buyers of such options might be writers who are closing 
out. However, if the writer is covered, especially where call options are concerned, 
he might decide to be assigned rather than close out his option. This means that the 
public seller is creating a rather larger supply that is not offset by a public demand. 
The market created by the arbitrageur, especially in the basic put or call arbitrage, 
essentially creates the demand. Without these arbitrageurs, there could conceivably 
be no buyers at all for those options that are short-lived and in-the-money, after pub­
lic writers have finished closing out their positions. 
Equivalence arbitrage - conversion, reversals, and box spreads - helps to keep 
the relative prices of puts and calls in line with each other and with the underlying 
stock price. This creates a more efficient and rational market for the public to oper­
ate in. The arbitrageur would help eliminate, for example, the case in which a public 
customer buys a call, sees the stock go up, but cannot find anyone to sell his call to 
at higher prices. If the call were too cheap, arbitrageurs would do reversals, which 
involve call purchases, and would therefore provide a market to sell into. 
Questions have been raised as to whether option trading affects stock prices, 
especially at or just before an expiration. If the amount of arbitrage in a certain issue 
becomes very large, it could appear to temporarily affect the price of the stock itself. 
For example, take the call arbitrage. This involves the sale of stock in the market. The 
corresponding stock purchase, via the call exercise, is not executed on the exchange. 
Thus, as far as the stock market is concerned, there may appear to be an inordinate 
amount of selling in the stock. If large numbers of basic call arbitrages are taking 
place, they might thus hold the price of the stock down until the calls expire. 
===== PDF page index 484 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 445 
The put arbitrage has an opposite effect. This arbitrage involves buying stock in 
the market. The offsetting stock sale via the put exercise takes place off the exchange. 
If a large amount of put arbitrage is being done, there may appear to be an inordi­
nate amount of buying in the stock. Such action might temporarily hold the stock 
price up. 
In a vast majority of cases, however, the arbitrage has no visible effect on the 
underlying stock price, because the amount of arbitrage being done is very small in 
comparison to the total number of trades in a given stock. Even if the open interest 
in a particular option is large, allowing for plenty of option volume by the arbi­
trageurs, the actual act of doing the arbitrage will force the prices of the stock and 
option back into line, thus destroying the arbitrage. 
Rather elaborate studies, including doctoral theses, have been written that try 
to prove or disprove the theory that option trading affects stock prices. Nothing has 
been proven conclusively, and it may never be, because of the complexity of the task. 
Logic would seem to dictate that arbitrage could temporarily affect a stock's move­
ment if it has discount, in-the-money options shortly before expiration. However, one 
would have to reasonably conclude that the size of these arbitrages could almost 
never be large enough to overcome a directional trend in the underlying stock itself. 
Thus, in the absence of a definite direction in the stock, arbitrage might help to per­
petuate the inertia; but if there were truly a preponderance of investors wanting to 
buy or sell the stock, these investors would totally dominate any arbitrage that might 
be in progress. 
RISK ARBITRAGE USING OPTIONS 
Risk arbitrage is a strategy that is well described by its name. It is basically an arbi­
trage - the same or equivalent securities are bought and sold. However, there is gen­
erally risk because the arbitrage usually depends on a future event occurring in 
order for the arbitrage to be successful. One form of risk arbitrage was described 
earlier concerning the speculation on the size of a special dividend that an underly­
ing stock might pay. That arbitrage consisted of buying the stock and buying the put, 
when the put' s time value premium is less than the amount of the projected special 
dividend. The risk lies in the arbitrageur's speculation on the size of the anticipated 
special dividend. 
MERGERS 
Risk arbitrage is an age-old type of arbitrage in the stock market. Generally, it con­
cerns speculation on whether a proposed merger or acquisition will actually go 
through as proposed. 
===== PDF page index 485 =====
446 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
Example: XYZ, which is selling for $50 per share, offers to buy out LMN and is offer­
ing to swap one share of its (XYZ's) stock for every two shares of LMN. This would 
mean that LMN should be worth $25 per share if the acquisition goes through as pro­
posed. On the day the takeover is proposed, LMN stock would probably rise to about 
$22 per share. It would not trade all the way up to 25 until the takeover was approved 
by the shareholders of LMN stock. The arbitrageur who feels that this takeover will 
be approved can take action. He would sell short XYZ and, for every share that he is 
short, he would buy 2 shares of LMN stock. If the merger goes through, he will prof­
it. The reason that he shorts XYZ as well as buying LMN is to protect himself in case 
the market price of XYZ drops before the acquisition is approved. In essence, he has 
sold XYZ and also bought the equivalent of XYZ (two shares of LMN will be equal to 
one share of XYZ if the takeover goes through). This, then, is clearly an arbitrage. 
However, it is a risk arbitrage because, if the stockholders of LMN reject the offer, 
he will surely lose money. His profit potential is equal to the remaining differential 
between the current market price of LMN (22) and the takeover price (25). If the 
proposed acquisition goes through, the differential disappears, and the arbitrageur 
has his profit. 
The greatest risk in a merger is that it is canceled. If that happens, stock being 
acquired (LMN) will fall in price, returning to its pre-takeover levels. In addition, the 
acquiring stock (XYZ) will probably rise. Thus, the risk arbitrageur can lose money 
on both sides of his trade. If either or both of the stocks involved in the proposed 
takeover have options, the arbitrageur may be able to work options into his strategy. 
In merger situations, since large moves can occur in both stocks ( they move in 
concert), option purchases are the preferable option strategy. If the acquiring com­
pany (XYZ) has in-the-money puts, then the purchase of those puts may be used 
instead of selling XYZ short. The advantage is that if XYZ rallies dramatically during 
the time it takes for the merger to take effect, then the arbitrageur's profits will be 
increased. 
Example: As above, assume that XYZ is at 50 and is acquiring LMN in a 2-for-l stock 
deal. LMN is at 22. Suppose that XYZ rallies to 60 by the time the deal closes. This 
would pull LMN up to a price of 30. If one had been short 100 XYZ at 50 and long 
200 LMN at 22, then his profit would be $600 - a $1,600 gain on the 200 long LMN 
minus a $1,000 loss on the XYZ short sale. 
Compare that result to a similar strategy substituting a long put for the short 
XYZ stock. Assume that he buys 200 LMN as before, but now buys an XYZ put. If 
one could buy an XYZ July 55 put with little time premium, say at 5½ points, then 
he would have nearly the same dollars of profit if the merger should go through with 
XYZ below 55. 
===== PDF page index 486 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 447 
However, when XYZ rallies to 60, his profit increases. He would still make the 
$1,600 on LMN as it rose from 22 to 30, but now would only lose $550 on the XYZ 
put - a total profit of $1,050 as compared to $600 with an all-stock position. 
The disadvantage to substituting long puts for short stock is that the arbitrageur 
does not receive credit for the short sale and, therefore, does not earn money at the 
carrying rate. This might not be as large a disadvantage as it initially seems, however, 
since it is often the case that it is very expensive - even impossible - to borrow the 
acquiring stock in order to short it. If the stock borrow costs are very large or if no 
stock can be located for borrowing, the purchase of an in-the-money put is a viable 
alternative. The purchase of an in-the-money put is preferable to an at- or out-of-the­
money put, because the amount of time value premium paid for the latter would take 
too much of the profitability away from the arbitrage if XYZ stayed unchanged or 
declined. This strategy may also save money if the merger falls apart and XYZ rises. 
The loss on the long put may well be less than the loss would be on short XYZ stock. 
Note also that one could sell the XYZ July 55 call short as well as buy the put. 
This would, of course, be synthetic short stock and is a pure substitute for shorting 
the stock. The use of this synthetic short is recommended only when the arbitrageur 
cannot borrow the acquiring stock. If this is his purpose, he should use the in-the­
money put and out-of-the-money call, since if he were assigned on the call, he could 
not borrow the stock to deliver it as a short sale. The use of an out-of-the-money call 
lessens the chance of eventual assignment. 
The companion strategy is to buy an in-the-money call instead of buying the 
company being acquired (LMN). This has advantages if the stock falls too far, either 
because the merger falls apart or because the stocks in the merger decline too far. 
Additionally, the cost of carrying the long LMN stock is eliminated, although that is 
generally built into the cost of the long calls. The larger amount of time value pre­
mium in calls as compared to puts makes this strategy often less attractive than that 
of buying the puts as a substitute for the short sale. 
One might also consider selling options instead of buying them. Generally this 
is an inferior strategy, but in certain instances it makes sense. The reason that option 
sales are inferior is that they do not limit one's risk in the risk arbitrage, but they cut 
off the profit. For example, if one sells puts on the company being acquired (LMN), 
he has a bullish situation. However, if the company being acquired (XYZ) rallies too 
far, there will be a loss, because the short puts will stop making money as soon as 
LMN rises through the strike. This is especially disconcerting if a takeover bidding 
war should develop for LMN. The arbitrageur who is long LMN will participate nice­
ly as LMN rises heavily in price during the bidding war. However, the put seller will 
not participate to nearly the same extent. 
===== PDF page index 487 =====
448 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
The sale of in-the-money calls as a substitute for shorting the acquiring compa­
ny (XYZ) can be beneficial at certain times. It is necessary to have a plus tick in order 
to sell stock short. When many arbitrageurs are trying to sell a stock short at the same 
time, it may be difficult to sell such stock short. Morever, natural owners of XYZ may 
see the arbitrageurs holding the price down and decide to sell their long stock rather 
than suffer through a possible decline in the stock's price while the merger is in 
progress. Additionally, buyers of XYZ will become very timid, lowering their bids for 
the same reasons. All of this may add up to a situation in which it is very difficult to 
sell the stock short, even if it can be borrowed. The sale of an in-the-money call can 
overcome this difficulty. The call should be deeply in-the-money and not be too long­
term, for the arbitrageur does not want to see XYZ decline below the strike of the 
call. If that happened, he would no longer be hedged; the other side of the arbitrage 
- the long LMN stock - would continue to decline, but he would not have any 
remaining short against the long LMN. 
LIMITS ON THE MERGER 
There is another type of merger for stock that is more difficult to arbitrage, but 
options may prove useful. In some merger situations, the acquiring company (XYZ) 
promises to give the shareholders of the company being acquired (LMN) an amount 
of stock equal to a set dollar price. This amount of stock would be paid even if the 
acquiring company rose or fell moderately in price. If XYZ falls too far, however, it 
cannot pay out an extraordinarily increased number of shares to LMN shareholders, 
so XYZ puts a limit on the maximum number of shares that it will pay for each share 
of LMN stock. Thus, the shareholders ofXYZ are guaranteed that there will be some 
downside buffer in terms of dilution of their company in case XYZ declines, as is 
often the case for an acquiring company. However, ifXYZ declines too far, then LMN 
shareholders will receive less. In return for getting this downside guarantee, XYZ will 
usually also stipulate that there is a minimum amount of shares that they will pay to 
LMN shareholders, even if XYZ stock rises tremendously. Thus, if XYZ should rise 
tremendously in price, then LMN shareholders will do even better than they had 
anticipated. An example will demonstrate this type of merger accord. 
Example: Assume that XYZ is at 50 and it intends to acquire LMN for a stated price 
of $25 per share, as in the previous example. However, instead of merely saying that 
it will exchange two shares of LMN for one share of XYZ, the company says that it 
wants the offer to be worth $25 per share to LMN shareholders as long as XYZ is 
between 45 and 55. Given this information, we can determine the maximum and 
minimum number of shares that LMN shareholders will receive: The maximum is 
===== PDF page index 488 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 449 
the stated price, 25, divided by the lower limit, 45, or 0.556 shares; the minimum is 
25 divided by the higher limit, 55, or 0.455. 
This type of merger is usually stated in terms of how many shares of XYZ will 
be issued, rather than in terms of the price range that XYZ will be able to move in. 
In either case, one can be derived from the other, so that the manner in which the 
merger deal is stated is merely a convention. In this case, for example, the merger 
might be stated as being worth $25 per share, with each share of LMN being worth 
at least 0.455 shares of XYZ and at most 0.556 shares of XYZ. Note that these ratios 
make the deal worth 25 as long as XYZ is between 45 and 55: 45 times 0.556 equals 
25, as does 0.455 times 55. 
If the acquiring stock, XYZ, is between 45 and 55 at the time the merger is com­
pleted, then the number of shares of XYZ that each LMN shareholder will receive is 
determined in a preset manner. Usually, at the time the merger is announced, XYZ 
will say that its price on the closing date of the merger will be used to establish the 
proper ratio. As a slight alternative, sometimes the acquiring company will state that 
the price to be used in determining the final ratio is to be an average of the closing 
prices of the stock over a stated period of time. This stated period of time might be 
something like the 10 days prior to the closing of the merger. 
Example: Suppose that the closing price of XYZ on the day that the merger closes is 
to be the price used in the ratio. Furthermore, suppose that XYZ closes at 51 on that 
day. It is within the prestated range, so a calculation must be done in order to deter­
mine how many shares of XYZ each LMN shareholder will get. This ratio is deter­
mined by dividing the stated price, 25, by the price in question, 51. This would give 
a final ratio of 0.490196. The final ratio is usually computed to a rather large number 
of decimal points in order to assure that LMN shareholders get as close to $25 per 
share as possible. 
The above two examples explain how this type of merger works. A merger of 
this type is said to have "hooks" - the prices at which the ratio steadies. This makes 
it difficult to arbitrage. As long as XYZ roams around in the 45 to 55 range, the arbi­
trageur does not want to short XYZ as part of his arbitrage, because the price of XYZ 
does not affect the price he will eventually receive for LMN 25. Rather, he would 
buy LMN and wait until the deal is near closing before actually shorting XYZ. By 
waiting, he will know approximately how many shares of XYZ to short for each share 
of LMN that he owns. The reason that he must short XYZ at the end of the merger 
is that there is usually a period of time before the physical stock is reorganized from 
LMN into XYZ. During that time, if he were long LMN, he would be at risk if he did 
not short XYZ against it. 
===== PDF page index 489 =====
450 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
Problems arise if XYZ begins to fall below 45 well before the closing of the 
merger, the lower "hook" in the merger. If it should remain below 45, then one 
should set up the arbitrage as being short 0.556 shares ofXYZ for each share of LMN 
that is held long. As long as XYZ remains below 45 until the merger closes, this is the 
proper ratio. However, if, after establishing that ratio, XYZ rallies back above 45, the 
arbitrageur can suffer damaging losses. XYZ may continue to rise in price, creating a 
loss on the short side. However, LMN will not follow it, because the merger is struc­
tured so that LMN is worth 25 unless XYZ rises too far. Thus, the long side stops fol­
lowing as the short side moves higher. 
On the other hand, no such problem exists if XYZ rises too far from its original 
price of 50, going above the upper "hook" of 55. In that case, the arbitrageur would 
already be long the LMN and would not yet have shorted XYZ, since the merger was 
not yet closing. LMN would merely follow XYZ higher after the latter had crossed 55. 
This is not an uncommon dilemma. Recall that it was shown that the acquiring 
stock will often fall in price immediately after a merger is announced. Thus, XYZ may 
fall close to, or below, the lower "hook." Some arbitrageurs attempt to hedge them­
selves by shorting a little XYZ as it begins to fall near 45 and then completing the 
short if it drops well below 45. The problem with handling the situation in this way 
is that one ends up with an inexact ratio. Essentially, he is forcing himself to predict 
the movements of XYZ. 
If the acquiring stock drops below the lower "hook," there may be an opportu­
nity to establish a hedge without these risks if that stock has listed options. The idea 
is to buy puts on the acquiring company, and for those puts to have a striking price 
nearly equal to the price of the lower "hook." The proper amount of the company 
being acquired (LMN) is then purchased to complete the arbitrage. If the acquiring 
company subsequently rallies back into the stated price range, the puts will not lose 
money past the striking price and the problems described in the preceding paragraph 
will have been overcome. 
Example: A merger is announced as described in the preceding example: XYZ is to 
acquire LMN at a stated value of $25 per share, with the stipulation that each share 
of LMN will be worth at least 0.455 shares of XYZ and at most 0.556 shares. These 
share ratios equate to prices of 45 and 55 on XYZ. 
Suppose that XYZ drops immediately in price after the merger is announced, 
and it falls to 40. Furthermore, suppose that the merger is expected to close some­
time during July and that there are XYZ August 45 puts trading at 5½. This repre­
sents only ½ point time value premium. The arbitrageur could then set up the arbi­
trage by buying 10,000 LMN and buying 56 of those puts. Smaller investors might 
buy 1,000 LMN and buy 6 puts. Either of these is in approximately the proper ratio 
of 1 LMN to 0.556 XYZ. 
===== PDF page index 490 =====
Chapter 27: Arbitrage 
TENDER OFFERS 
451 
Another type of corporate takeover that falls under the broad category of risk arbi­
trage is the tender offer. In a tender offer, the acquiring company normally offers to 
exchange cash for shares of the company to be acquired. Sometimes the off er is for 
all of the shares of the company being acquired; sometimes it is for a fractional por­
tion of shares. In the latter case, it is important to know what is intended to be done 
with the remaining shares. These might be exchanged for shares of the acquiring 
company, or they might be exchanged for other securities (bonds, most likely), or 
perhaps there is no plan for exchanging them at all. In some cases, a company ten­
ders for part of its own stock, so that it is in effect both the acquirer and the acquiree. 
Thus, tender offers can be complicated to arbitrage properly. The use of options can 
lessen the risks. 
In the case in which the acquiring company is making a cash tender for all the 
shares (called an "any and all" offer), the main use of options is the purchase of puts 
as protection. One would buy puts on the company being acquired at the same time 
that he bought shares of that company. If the deal fell apart for some reason, the puts 
could prevent a disastrous loss as the acquiring stock dropped. The arbitrageur must 
be judicious in buying these puts. If they are too expensive or too far out-of-the­
money, or if the acquiring company might not really drop very far if the deal falls 
apart, then the purchase of puts is a waste. However, if there is substantial downside 
risk, the put purchase may be useful. 
Selling options in an "any and all" deal often seems like easy money, but there 
may be risks. If the deal is completed, the company being acquired will disappear and 
its options would be delisted. Therefore, it may often seem reasonable to sell out-of­
the-money puts on the acquiring company. If the deal is completed, these expire 
worthless at the closing of the merger. However, if the deal falls through, these puts 
will soar in price and cause a large loss. On the other hand, it may also seem like easy 
money to sell naked calls with a striking price higher than the price being offered for 
the stock. Again, if the deal goes through, these will be delisted and expire worthless. 
The risk in this situation is that another company bids a higher price for the compa­
ny on which the calls were written. If this happens, there might suddenly be a large 
upward jump in price, and the written calls could suffer a large loss. 
Options can play a more meaningful role in the tender off er that is for only part 
of the stock, especially when it is expected that the remaining stock might fall sub­
stantially in price after the partial tender offer is completed. An example of a partial 
tender offer might help to establish the scenario. 
Example: XYZ proposes to buy back part of its own stock It has offered to pay $70 
per share for half the company. There are no plans to do anything further. Based on 