
===== PDF page index 254 =====
Chapter 12: Combining Calendar and Ratio Spreads 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
229 
If one decides to preserve a neutral strategy with follow-up action in either type of 
ratio call calendar, he would merely need to look at the deltas of the calls and keep 
the ratio neutral. Doing so might mean that one would switch from one type of cal­
endar spread to the other, from the out-of-the-money with naked calls to the in-the­
money with extra long calls, or vice versa. For example, if XYZ started at 45, as in the 
first example, one would have sold more calls than he bought. If XYZ then rallied 
above 50, he would have to move his position into the in-the-money ratio and get 
long more calls than he is short. 
While such follow-up action is strategically correct maintaining the neutral 
ratio - it might not make sense practically, especially if the size of the original spread 
were small. If one had originally sold 5 and bought 3, he would be better to adhere 
to the follow-up strategy outlined earlier in this chapter. The spread is not large 
enough to dictate adjusting via the delta-neutral ratios. If, however, a large trader had 
originally sold 500 calls and bought 300, then he has enough profitability in the 
spread to make several adjustments along the way. 
In a similar manner, the spreader who had established a small in-the-money cal­
endar might decide not to bother rationing the spread if the stock dropped below the 
strike. He knows his risk is limited to his initial debit, and that would be small for a 
small spread. He might not want to introduce naked options into the position if XYZ 
declines. However, if the same spread were established by a large trader, it should be 
adjusted because of the greater tolerance of the spread to being adjusted, merely 
because of its size. 
===== PDF page index 255 =====
Reverse Spreads 
In general, when a strategy has the term "reverse" in its name, the strategy is the 
opposite of a more commonly used strategy. The reader should be familiar with this 
nomenclature from the earlier discussions comparing ratio writing (buying stock and 
selling calls) with reverse hedging (shorting stock and buying calls). If the reverse 
strategy is sufficiently well-known, it usually acquires a name of its own. For exam­
ple, the bear spread is really the reverse of the bull spread, but the bear spread is a 
popular enough strategy in its own right to have acquired a shorter, unique name. 
REVERSE CALENDAR SPREAD 
The reverse calendar spread is an infrequently used strategy, at least for public cus­
tomers trading stock or index options, because of the margin requirements. However, 
even then, it does have a place in the arsenal of the option strategist. Meanwhile, pro­
fessionals and futures option traders use the strategy with more frequency because 
the margin treatment is more favorable for them. 
As its name implies, the reverse calendar spread is a position that is just the 
opposite of a "normal" calendar spread. In the reverse calendar spread, one sells a 
long-term call option and simultaneously buys a shorter-term call option. The spread 
can be constructed with puts as well, as will be shown in a later chapter. Both calls 
have the same striking price. 
This strategy will make money if one of two things happens: Either (1) the stock 
price moves away from the striking price by a great deal, or (2) the inplied volatility 
of the options involved in the spread shrinks. For readers familiar with the "normal" 
calendar spread strategy, the first way to profit should be obvious, because a "normal" 
230 
===== PDF page index 256 =====
Chapter 13: Reverse Spreads 231 
calendar spread makes the most money if the stock is right at the strike price at expi­
ration, and it loses money if the stock rises or falls too far. 
As with any spread involving options expiring in differing months, it is common 
practice to look at the profitability of the position at or before the near-term expira­
tion. An example will show how this strategy can profit. 
Example: Suppose the current month is April and that XYZ is trading at 80. 
Furthermore, suppose that XYZ's options are quite expensive, and one believes the 
underlying stock will be volatile. A reverse calendar spread would be a way to profit 
from these assumptions. The following prices exist: 
XYZ December 80 call: 12 
XYZ July 80 call: 7 
A reverse calendar spread is established by selling the December 80 call for 12 
points, and buying the July 80 call for 7, a net credit of 5 points for the spread. 
If, later, XYZ falls dramatically, both call options will be nearly worthless and the 
spread could be bought back for a price well below 5. For example, if XYZ were to 
fall to 50 in a month or so, the July 80 call would be nearly worthless and the 
December 80 call could be bought back for about a point. Thus, the spread would 
have shrunk from its initial price of 5 to a price of about 1, a profit of 4 points. 
The other way to make money would be for implied volatility to decrease. 
Suppose implied volatility dropped after a month had passed. Then the spread might 
be worth something like 4 points - an unrealized profit of about 1 point, since it was 
sold for a price of 5 initially. 
The profit graph in Figure 13-1 shows the profitability of the reverse calendar. 
There are two lines on the graph, both of which depict the results at the expiration 
of the near-term option (the July 80 call in the above example). The lower line shows 
where profits and losses would occur if implied volatility remained unchanged. You 
can see that the position could profit if XYZ were to rise above 98 or fall below 70. 
In addition, the higher curve on the graph shows where profits would lie if implied 
volatility fell prior to expiration of the near-term options. In that case, additional prof­
its would accrue, as depicted on the graph. 
So there are two ways to make money with this strategy, and it is therefore best 
to establish it when implied volatility is high and the underlying has a tendency to be 
volatile. 
The problem with this spread, for stock and index option traders, is that the call 
that is sold is considered to be naked. This is preposterous, of course, since the short­
term call is a perfectly valid hedge until it expires. Yet the margin requirements 
remain onerous. When they were overhauled recently, this glaring inefficiency was 
===== PDF page index 257 =====
232 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Figure 13-1 • 
Calendar spread sale at near-term expiration. 
$400 
$300 
Implied Volatility 
Lower 
$200 \ 
f/) 
$100 f/) 
0 
~ 
$0 50 60 110 120 
a. -$100 
-$200 
-$300 
Implied Volatility 
-$400 Remains High 
-$500 
Underlying Price 
allowed to stand because none of the member firms cared about changing it. Still, if 
one has excess collateral - perhaps from a large stock portfolio - and is interested in 
generating excess income in a hedged manner, then the strategy might be applicable 
for him as well. Futures option traders receive more favorable margin requirements, 
and it thus might be a more economical strategy for them. 
REVERSE RATIO SPREAD (BACKSPREAD) 
A more popular reverse strategy is the reverse ratio call spread, which is comrrwnly 
known as a backspread. In this type of spread, one would sell a call at one striking 
price and then would buy several calls at a higher striking price. This is exactly the 
opposite of the ratio spread described in Chapter 11. Some traders refer to any 
spread with unlimited profit potential on at least one side as a backspread. Thus, in 
most backspreading strategies, the spreader wants the stock to rrwve dramatically. He 
does not generally care whether it moves up or down. Recall that in the reverse 
hedge strategy (similar to a straddle buy) described in Chapter 4, the strategist had 
the potential for large profits if the stock moved either up or down by a great deal. 
In the backspread strategy discussed here, large potential profits exist if the stock 
moves up dramatically, but there is limited profit potential to the downside. 
Example: XYZ is selling for 43 and the July 40 call is at 4, with the July 45 call at l. 
A reverse ratio spread would be established as follows: · 