
===== PDF page index 440 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 401 
LEAPS calls may help to alleviate this problem. Since they are such long-term 
calls, they are likely to have some time value premium in them. In-the-money calls that 
have time value premium are not normally assigned. As an alternative to shorting a 
stock that is not borrowable, one might try to sell an in-the-money LEAPS call, but 
only if it has time value premium remaining. Just because the call has a long time 
remaining until expiration does not mean that it must have time value premium, as will 
be seen in the following discussion. Finally, if one does sell the LEAPS call, he must 
realize that if the stock drops, the LEAPS call will not follow it completely. As the stock 
nears the strike, the amount of time value premium will build up to an even greater 
level in the LEAPS. Still, the naked call seller would make some profit in that case, and 
it presents a better alternative than not being able to sell the stock short at all. 
Early Assignment. An American-style option is one that can be exercised at any 
time during its life. All listed equity options, LEAPS included, are of this variety. 
Thus, any in-the-money option that has been sold may become subject to early 
assignment. The clue to whether early assignment is imminent is whether there is 
time value premium in the option. If the option has no time value premium - in other 
words, it is trading at parity or at a discount then assignment may be close at hand. 
The option writer who does not want to be assigned would want to cover the option 
when it no longer carries time premium. 
LEAPS may be subject to early assignment as well. It is possible, albeit far less 
likely, that a long-term option would lose all of its time value premium and therefore 
be subject to early assignment. This would certainly happen if the underlying stock 
were being taken over and a tender off er were coming to fruition. However, it may 
also occur because of an impending dividend payment, or more specifically, because 
the stock is about to go ex-dividend. Recall that the call owner, LEAPS calls includ­
ed, is not entitled to any dividends paid by the underlying stock. So if the call owner 
wants the dividend, he exercises his call on the day before the stock goes ex-dividend. 
This makes him an owner of the common stock just in the nick of time to get the div­
idend. 
What economic factors motivate him to exercise the call? If there is any time 
value premium at all in the call, the call holder would be better off selling the call in 
the open market and then purchasing the stock in the open market as well. In this 
manner, he would still get the dividend, but he would get a better price for his call 
when he sold it. If, however, there is no time value premium in the call, he does not 
have to bother with two transactions in the open market; he merely exercises his call 
in order to buy stock. 
All well and good, but what makes the call sell at parity before expiration? It has 
to do with the arbitrage that is available for any call option. In this case, the arbitrage 
===== PDF page index 441 =====
402 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
is not the simple discount arbitrage that was discussed in Chapter l when this topic 
was covered. Rather, it is a more complicated form that is discussed in greater detail 
in Chapter 28. Suffice it to say that if the dividend is larger than the interest that can 
be earned from a credit balance equal to the striking price, then the time value pre­
mium will disappear from the call. 
Example: XYZ is a $30 stock and about to go ex-dividend 50 cents. The prevailing 
short-term interest rate is 5% and there are LEAPS with a striking price of 20. 
A 50-cent quarterly dividend on a striking price of 20 is an annual dividend rate 
(on the strike) of 10%. Since short-term rates are much lower than that, arbitrageurs 
economically cannot pay out 10% for dividends and earn 5% for their credit balances. 
In this situation, the LEAPS call would lose its time value premium and would 
be a candidate for early exercise when the stock goes ex-dividend. 
In actual practice, the situation is more complicated than this, because the price 
of the puts comes into play; but this example shows the general reasoning that the 
arbitrageur must go through. 
Certain arbitrageurs construct positions that allow them to earn interest on a 
credit balance equal to the striking price of the call. This position involves being short 
the underlying stock and being long the call. Thus, when the stock goes ex-dividend, 
the arbitrageur will owe the dividend. If, however, the amount of the dividend is 
more than he vvill earn in interest from his credit balance, he will merely exercise his 
call to cover his short stock. This action will prevent him from having to pay out the 
dividend. 
The arbitrageur's exercise of the call means that someone is going to be 
assigned. If you are a writer of the call, it could be you. It is not important to under­
stand the arbitrage completely; its effect will be reflected in the marketplace in the 
form of a call trading at parity or a discount. Thus, even a LEAPS call with a sub­
stantial anwunt of time rernaining may be assigned if it is trading at parity. 
STRADDLE SELLING 
Straddle selling is equivalent to ratio writing and is a strategy whereby one attempts 
to sell ( overpriced) options in order to produce a range of stock prices within which 
the option seller can profit. The strategy often involves follow-up action as the stock 
moves around, and the strategist feels that he must adjust his position in order to pre­
vent large losses. LEAPS puts and calls might be used for this strategy. However, 
their long-term nature is often not conducive to the aims of straddle selling. 
First, consider the effect of time decay. One might normally sell a three-month 
straddle. If the stock "behaves" and is relatively unchanged after two months have 
===== PDF page index 442 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 403 
passed, the straddle seller could reasonably expect to have a profit of about 40% of 
the original straddle price. However, if one had sold a 2-year LEAPS straddle, and 
the stock were relatively unchanged after two months, he would only have a profit of 
about 7% of the original sale price. This should not be surprising in light of what has 
been demonstrated about the decaying of long-term options. It should make the 
straddle seller somewhat leery of using LEAPS, however, unless he truly thinks the 
options are overpriced. 
Second, consider follow-up action. Recall that in Chapter 20, it was shown that 
the bane of the straddle seller was the whipsaw. A whipsaw occurs when one makes 
a follow-up protective action on one side (for instance, he does something bullish 
because the underlying stock is rising and the short calls are losing money), only to 
have the stock reverse and come crashing back down. Obviously, the more time left 
until expiration, the more likely it is that a whipsaw will occur after any follow-up 
action, and the more expensive it will be, since there will be a lot of time value pre­
mium left in the options that are being repurchased. This makes LEAPS straddle 
selling less than attractive. 
LEAPS straddles may look expensive because of their large absolute price, and 
therefore may appear to be attractive straddle sale candidates. However, the price is 
often justified, and the seller of LEAPS straddles will be fighting sudden stock move­
ments without getting much benefit from the passage of time. The best time to sell 
LEAPS straddles is when short-term rates are high and volatilities are high as well 
(i.e., the options are overpriced). At least, in those cases, the seller will derive some 
real benefit if rates or volatilities should drop. 
SPREADS USING LEAPS 
Any of the spread strategies previously discussed can be implemented with LEAPS 
as well, if one desires. The margin requirements are the same for LEAPS spreads as 
they are for ordinary equity option spreads. One general category of spread lends 
itself well to using LEAPS: that of buying a longer-term option and selling a short­
term one. Calendar spreads, as well as diagonal spreads, fall into that category. 
The combinations are myriad, but the reasoning is the same. One wants to own 
the option that is not so subject to time decay, while simultaneously selling the 
option that is quite subject to time decay. Of course, since LEAPS are long-term and 
therefore expensive, one is generally taking on a large debit in such a spread and 
may have substantial risk if the stock performs adversely. Other risks may be pres­
ent as well. As a means of demonstrating these facts, let us consider a simple bull 
spread using calls. 
===== PDF page index 443 =====
404 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Example: The following prices exist in the month of January: 
XYZ: 105 
April 100 call: 10 1/2 
April 110 call: 5 1/2 
January (2-year) 100 call: 26 
January (2-year) 110 call: 21 1/2 
An investor is considering a bull spread in XYZ and is unsure about whether to use 
the short-term calls, the LEAPS calls, or a mixture. These are his choices: 
Short-term bull spread: 
Diagonal bull spread: 
LEAPS bull spread: 
Buy April 100@ 101/2 
Sell April 110@ 51/2 
Net Debit: $500 
Buy January LEAPS 100 @ 26 
Sell April 110@ 51/2 
Net Debit: $2,050 
Buy January LEAPS 1 00 @ 26 
Sell January LEAPS 110@ 21 1/2 
Net Debit: $450 
Notice that the debit paid for the LEAPS spread is slightly less than that of the short­
term bull spread. This means that they have approximately the same profit potential 
at their respective expiration dates. However, the strategist is more concerned with 
how these compare directly with each other. The obvious point in time to make this 
comparison is when the short-term options expire. 
Figure 25-7 shows the profitability of these three positions at April expiration. 
It was assumed that all of the following were the same in April as they had been in 
January: volatility, short-term rates, and dividend payout. 
Note that the short-term bull spread has the familiar profit graph from Chapter 
7, making its maximum profit over 110 and taking its maximum loss below 100. (See 
Table 25-4.) 
The LEAPS spread doesn't generate much of either a profit or a loss in only 
three months' time. Even if XYZ rises to 120, the LEAPS bull spread will have only 
a $150 profit. Conversely, if XYZ falls to 80, the spread loses only about $200. This 
price action is very typical for long-term bull spreads when both options have a sig­
nificant amount of time premium remaining in them. 
===== PDF page index 444 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 
FIGURE 25-7. 
Bull spread comparison at April expiration. 
Stock Price 
405 
The diagonal spread is different, however. Typically, the maximum profit poten­
tial of a bull spread is the difference in the strikes less the initial debit paid. For this 
diagonal spread, that would be $1,000 minus $2,050, a loss! Obviously, this simple 
formula is not applicable to diagonal spreads, because the purchased option still has 
time value premium when the written option expires. The profit graph shows that 
indeed the diagonal spread is the most bullish of the three. It makes its best profit at 
the strike of the written option - a standard procedure for any spread - and that prof­
it is greater than either of the other two spreads at April expiration ( under the sig-
TABLE 25-4. 
Bull spread comparison at April expiration. 
Stock Price Short-Term Diagonal LEAPS 
80 -500 -1, 100 -200 
90 -500 - 600 -150 
100 -500 50 - 25 
110 500 750 50 
120 500 550 150 
140 500 150 250 
160 500 50 350 
180 500 - 350 450 
===== PDF page index 445 =====
406 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
nificant assumption that volatility and interest rates are unchanged). If XYZ trades 
higher than llO, the diagonal spread will lose some of its profit; in fact, if XYZ were 
to trade at a very high price, the diagonal spread would actually have a loss (see Table 
25-4). Whenever the purchased LEAPS call loses its time value premium, the diag­
onal spread will not perform as well. 
If the common stock drops in price, the diagonal spread has the greatest risk in 
dollar terms but not in percentage terms, because it has the largest initial debit. If 
XYZ falls to 80 in three months, the spread will lose about $1,100, just over half the 
initial $2,050 debit. Obviously, the short-term spread would have lost 100% of its ini­
tial debit, which is only $500, at that same point in time. 
The diagonal spread presents an opportunity to earn more money if the under­
lying common is near the strike of the written option when the written option expires. 
However, if the common moves a great deal in either direction, the diagonal spread 
is the worst of the three. This means that the diagonal spread strategy is a neutral 
strategy: One wants the underlying common to remain near the written strike until 
the near-term option expires. This is a true statement even if the diagonal spread is 
under the guise of a bullish spread, as in the previous example. 
Many traders are fond of buying LEAPS and selling an out-of-the-money near­
term call as a hedge. Be careful about doing this. If the underlying common rises too 
fast and/or interest rates fall and/or volatility decreases, this could be a poor strategy. 
There is really nothing quite as psychologically damaging as being right about the 
stock, but being in the wrong option strategy and therefore losing money. Consider 
the above examples. Ostensibly, the spreader was bullish on XYZ; that's why he chose 
bull spreads. If XYZ became a wildly bullish stock and rose from 100 to 180 in three 
months, the diagonal spreader would have lost money. He couldn't have been happy 
- no one would be. This is something to keep in mind when diagonalizing a LEAPS 
spread. 
The deltas of the options involved in the spread will give one a good clue as to 
how it is going to perform. Recall that a short-term, in-the-money option acquires a 
rather high delta, especially as expiration draws nigh. However, an in-the-money 
LEAPS call will not have an extremely high delta, because of the vast amount of time 
remaining. Thus, one is short an option with a high delta and long an option with a 
smaller delta. These deltas indicate that one is going to lose money if the underlying 
stock rises in price. Consider the following situation: 
XYZ Stock, 120: 
Call 
Long 1 January LEAPS 100 call: 
Short 1 April 110 call: 
Position Delta 
0.70 
-0.90 
===== PDF page index 446 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 401 
At this point, if XYZ rises in price by 1 point, the spread can be expected to lose 20 
cents, since the delta of the short option is 0.20 greater than the delta of the long 
option. 
This phenomenon has ramifications for the diagonal spreader of LEAPS. If the 
two strike prices of the spread are too close together, it may actually be possible to 
construct a bull spread that loses money on the upside. That would be very difficult 
for most traders to accept. In the above example, as depicted in Table 25-4, that's 
what happens. One way around this is to widen the strike prices out so that there is 
at least some profit potential, even if the stock rises dramatically. That may be diffi­
cult to do and still be able to sell the short-term option for any meaningful amount 
of premium. 
Note that a diagonal spread could even be considered as a substitute for a cov­
ered write in some special cases. It was shown that a LEAPS call can sometimes be 
used as a substitute for the common stock, with the investor placing the difference 
between the cost of the LEAPS call and the cost of the stock in the bank (or in T­
bills). Suppose that an investor is a covered writer, buying stock and selling relative­
ly short-term calls against it. If that investor were to make a LEAPS call substitution 
for his stock, he would then have a diagonal bull spread. Such a diagonal spread 
would probably have less risk than the one described above, since the investor pre­
sumably chose the LEAPS substitution because it was "cheap." Still, the potential 
pitfalls of the diagonal bull spread would apply to this situation as well. Thus, if one 
is a covered writer, this does not necessarily mean that he can substitute LEAPS calls 
for the long stock without taking care. The resulting position may not resemble a cov­
ered write as much as he thought it would. 
The "bottom line" is that if one pays a debit greater than the difference in the 
strike prices, he may eventually lose money if the stock rises far enough to virtually 
eliminate the time value premium of both options. This comes into play also if one 
rolls his options down if the underlying stock declines. Eventually, by doing so, he 
may invert the strikes - i.e., the striking price of the written option is lower than the 
striking price of the option that is owned. In that case, he will have locked in a loss if 
the overall credit he has received is less than the difference in the strikes - a quite 
likely event. So, for those who think this strategy is akin to a guaranteed profit, think 
again. It most certainly is not. 
Backspreads. LEAPS may be applied to other popular forms of diagonal spreads, 
such as the one in which in-the-money, near-term options are sold, and a greater quan­
tity of longer-term (LEAPS) at- or out-of-the money calls are bought. (This was 
referred to as a diagonal backspread in Chapter 14.) This is an excellent strategy, and 
===== PDF page index 447 =====
408 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
a LEAPS may be used as the long option in the spread. Recall that the object of the 
spread is for the stock to be volatile, particularly to the upside if calls are used. If that 
doesn't happen, and the stock declines instead, at least the premium captured from 
the in-the-money sale will be a gain to offset against the loss suffered on the longer­
term calls that were purchased. The strategy can be established with puts as well, in 
which case the spreader would want the underlying stock to fall dramatically while the 
spread was in place. 
Without going into as much detail as in the examples above, the diagonal back­
spreader should realize that he is going to have a significant debit in the spread and 
could lose a significant portion of it should the underlying stock fall a great deal in 
price. To the upside, his LEAPS calls will retain some time value premium and will 
move quite closely with the underlying common stock. Thus, he does not have to buy 
as many LEAPS as he might think in order to have a neutral spread. 
Example: XYZ is at 105 and a spreader wants to establish a backspread. Recall that 
the quantity of options to use in a neutral strategy is determined by dividing the 
deltas of the two options. Assume the following prices and deltas exist: 
Option 
April 100 call 
July 110 call 
January (2-year) LEAPS 100 call 
XYZ: 105 in January 
Price 
8 
5 
15 
Delta 
0.75 
0.50 
0.60 
Two backspreads are available with these options. In the first, one would sell the 
April 100 calls and buy the July llO calls. He would be selling 3-month calls and buy­
ing 6-month calls. The neutral ratio is 0.75/0.50 or 3 to 2; that is, 3 calls are to be 
bought for every 2 sold. Thus, a neutral spread would be: 
Buy 6 July 110 calls 
Sell 4 April l 00 calls 
As a second alternative, he might use the LEAPS as the long side of the spread; he 
would still sell the April 100 calls as the short side of the spread. In this case, his neu­
tral ratio would be 0.75/0.60, or 5 to 4. The resulting neutral spread would be: 
Buy 5 January LEAPS 110 calls 
Sell 4 April 100 calls 
===== PDF page index 448 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 409 
Thus, a neutral backspread involving LEAPS requires buyingfewer calls than a neu­
tral backspread involving a 6-rnonth option on the long side. This is because the delta 
of the LEAPS call is larger. The significant point here is that, because of the time 
value retention of the LEAPS call, even when the stock moves higher, it is not nec­
essary to buy as many. If one does not use the deltas, but merely figures that 3 to 2 
is a good ratio for any diagonal backspread, then he will be overly bullish if he uses 
LEAPS. That could cost him if the underlying stock declines. 
Calendar Spreads. LEAPS may also be used in calendar spreads - spreads in 
which the striking price of the longer-term option purchased and the shorter-term 
option sold are the same. The calendar spread is a neutral strategy, wherein the 
spreader wants the underlying stock to be as close as possible to the striking price 
when the near-term option expires. A calendar spread has risk if the stock moves too 
far away from the striking price (see Chapters 9 and 22). Purchasing a LEAPS call 
increases that risk in terms of dollars, not percentage, because of the larger debit that 
one must spend for the spread. 
Simplistically, calendar spreads are established with equal quantities of options 
bought and sold. This is often not a neutral strategy in the true sense. As was shown 
in Chapter 9 on call calendar spreads, one may want to use the deltas of the two 
options to establish a truly neutral calendar spread, particularly if the stock is not ini­
tially right at the striking price. Out-of-the-money, one would sell more calls than he 
is buying. Conversely, in-the-money, one would buy more calls than he is selling. 
Both strategies statistically have merit and are attractive. When using LEAPS deltas 
to construct the neutral spread, one need generally buy fewer calls than he might 
think, because of the higher delta of a LEAPS call. This is the same phenomenon 
described in the previous example of a diagonal backspread. 
SUMMARY 
LEAPS are nothing more than long-term options. They are usable in a wide variety 
of strategies in the same way that any option would be. Their margin and investment 
requirements are similar to those of the more familiar equity options. Both LEAPS 
puts and calls are traded, and there is a secondary market for them as well. 
There are certain differences between the prices of LEAPS and those of short­
er-term options, but the greatest is the relatively large effect that interest rates and 
dividends have on the price of LEAPS, because LEAPS are long-term options. 
Increases in interest rates will cause LEAPS to increase in price, while increases in 
dividend payout will cause LEAPS calls to decrease in price and LEAPS puts to 
===== PDF page index 449 =====
410 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
increase in price. As usual, volatility has a major effect on the price of an option, and 
LEAPS are no exception. Even small changes in the volatility of the underlying com­
mon stock can cause large price differences in a two-year option. The rate of decay 
due to time is much smaller for LEAPS, since they are long-term options. Finally, the 
deltas of LEAPS calls are larger than those of short-term calls; conversely, the deltas 
of LEAPS puts are smaller. 
Several common strategies lend themselves well to the usage of LEAPS. A 
LEAPS may be used as a stock substitute if the cash not invested in the stock is 
instead deposited in a CD or T-bill. LEAPS puts can be bought as protection for 
common stock. Speculative option buyers will appreciate the low rate of time decay 
of LEAPS. LEAPS calls can be written against common stock, thereby creating a 
covered write, although the sale of naked LEAPS puts is probably a better strategy 
in most cases. Spread strategies with LEAPS may be viable as well, but the spreader 
should carefully consider the ramifications of buying a long-term option and selling 
a shorter-term one against it. If the underlying stock moves a great distance quickly, 
the spread strategy may not perform as expected. 
Overall, LEAPS are not very different from the shorter-term options to which 
traders and investors have become accustomed. Once these investors become famil­
iar with the way these long-term options are affected by the various factors that 
determine the price of an option, they will consider the use of LEAPS as an integral 
part of a strategic arsenal. 
===== PDF page index 450 =====
Additional 
Considerations 
===== PDF page index 451 =====

===== PDF page index 452 =====
Buying Options 
and Treasury Bills 
Numerous strategies have been described, ranging from the simple to the complex. 
Each one has advantages, but there are disadvantages as well. In fact, some of them 
may be too complex for the average investor to seriously consider implementing. The 
reader may feel that there should be an easier answer. Isn't there a strategy that 
might not require such a large investment or so much time spent in monitoring the 
position, but would still have a chance of returning a reasonable profit? In fact, there 
is a strategy that has not yet been described, a strategy considered by some experts 
in the field of mathematical analysis to be the best of them all. Simply stated, the 
strategy consists of putting 90% of one's money in risk-free investments (such as 
short-term Treasury bills) and buying options with the remaining 10% of one's funds. 
It has previously been pointed out that some of the more attractive strategies 
are those that involve small levels of risk with the potential for large profits. Usually, 
these types of strategies inherently have a rather large frequency of small losses, and 
a small probability of realizing large gains. Their advantage lies in the fact that one or 
two large profits can conceivably more than make up for numerous small losses. This 
Treasury bill/option strategy is another strategy of this type. 
HOW THE TREASURY BILL/OPTION STRATEGY OPERATES 
Although there are certain details involved in operating this strategy, it is basically a 
simple one to approach. First, the most that one can lose is 10%, less the interest 
earned on the fixed-income portion of his portfolio (the remaining 90% of his assets), 
during the life of the purchased options. It is a simple matter to space out one's com-
413 