
===== PDF page index 745 =====
Futures Option Strategies for 
Futures Spreads 
A spread with futures is not the same as a spread with options, except that one item 
is bought while another is simultaneously sold. In this manner, one side of the spread 
hedges the risk of the other. This chapter describes futures spreading and offers ways 
to use options as an adjunct to those spreads. 
The concept of calendar spreading with futures options is covered in this chap­
ter as well. This is the one strategy that is very different when using futures options, 
as opposed to using stock or index options. 
FUTURES SPREADS 
Before getting into option strategies, it is necessary to define futures spreads and to 
examine some common futures spreading strategies. 
FUTURES PRICING DIFFERENTIALS 
It has already been shown that, for any paiticular physical commodity, there are, at 
any one time, several futures that expire in different months. Oil futures have month­
ly expirations; sugar futures expire in only five months of any one calendar year. The 
frequency of expiration months depends on which futures contract one is discussing. 
Futures on the same underlying commodity will trade at different prices. The 
differential is due to several factors, not just time, as is the case with stock options. A 
major factor is carrying costs - how much one would spend to buy and hold the phys-
696 
===== PDF page index 746 =====
Chapter 35: Futures Option Strategies for Futures Spreads 697 
ical commodity until futures expiration. However, other factors may enter in as well, 
including supply and demand considerations. In a normal carrying cost market, 
futures that expire later in time are more expensive than those that are nearer-term. 
Example: Gold is a commodity whose futures exhibit forward or normal carry. 
Suppose it is March 1st and spot gold is trading at 351. Then, the futures contracts 
on gold and their respective prices might be as follows: 
Expiration Month Price 
April 352.50 
June 354.70 
August 356.90 
December 361.00 
June 366.90 
Notice that each successive contract is more expensive than the previous one. 
There is a 2.20 differential between each of the first three expirations, equal to 1.10 
per month of additional expiration time. However, the differential is not quite that 
great for the December, which expires in 9 months, or for the June contract, which 
expires in 15 months. The reason for this might be that longer-term interest rates are 
slightly lower than the short-term rates, and so the cost of carry is slightly less. 
However, prices in all futures don't line up this nicely. In some cases, different 
months may actually represent different products, even though both are on the same 
underlying physical commodity. For example, wheat is not always wheat. There is a 
summer crop and a winter crop. While the two may be related in general, there could 
be a substantial difference between the July wheat futures contract and the 
December contract, for example, that has very little to do with what interest rates are. 
Sometimes short-term demand can dominate the interest rate effect, and a 
series of futures contracts can be aligned such that the short-term futures are more 
expensive. This is known as a reverse carrying charge market, or contango. 
INTRAMARKET FUTURES SPREADS 
Some futures traders attempt to predict the relationships between various expiration 
months on the same underlying physical commodity. That is, one might buy July 
soybean futures and sell September soybean futures. When one both buys and sells 
differing futures contracts, he has a spread. When both contracts are on the same 
underlying physical commodity, he has an intramarket spread. 
~ 
===== PDF page index 747 =====
698 Part V: Index Options and Futures 
The spreader is not attempting to predict the overall direction of prices. Rather, 
he is trying to predict the differential in prices between the July and September con­
tracts. He doesn't care if beans go up or down, as long as the spread between July and 
September goes his way. 
Example: A spread trader notices that historic price charts show that if September 
soybeans get too expensive with respect to July soybeans, the differential usually dis­
appears in a month or two. The opportunity for establishing this trade usually occurs 
early in the year - February or March. 
Assume it is February 1st, and the following prices exist: 
July soybean futures: 600 ($6.00/bushel) 
September soybean futures: 606 
The price differential is 6 cents. It rarely gets worse than 12 cents, and often revers­
es to the point that July futures are more expensive than soybean futures - some 
years as much as 100 cents more expensive. 
If one were to trade this spread from a historical perspective, he would thus be 
risking approximately 6 cents, with possibilities of making over 100 cents. That is 
certainly a good risk/reward ratio, if historic price patterns hold up in the current 
environment. 
Suppose that one establishes the spread: 
Buy one July future @ 600 
Sell one September future @ 606 
At some later date, the following prices and, hence, profits and losses, exist. 
Futures Price 
July: 650 
September: 630 
Total Profit: 
Profit/Loss 
+50 cents 
-24 cents 
26 cents ($1,300) 
The spread has inverted, going from an initial state in which September was 6 
cents more expensive than July, to a situation in which July is 20 cents more expen­
sive. The spreader would thus make 26 cents, or $1,300, since 1 cent in beans is 
worth $50. 
===== PDF page index 748 =====
Chapter 35: Futures Option Strategies for Futures Spreads 699 
Notice that the same profit would have been made at any of the following pairs 
of prices, because the price differential between July and September is 20 cents in 
all cases (with July being the more expensive of the two). 
July Futures September Futures July Profit September Profit 
420 400 -180 +206 
470 450 -130 +156 
550 530 -50 +76 
600 580 0 +26 
650 630 +50 -24 
700 680 +100 -74 
800 780 +200 -174 
Therefore, the same 26-cent profit can be made whether soybeans are in a 
severe bear market, in a rousing bull market, or even somewhat unchanged. The 
spreader is only concerned with whether the spread widens from a 6-cent differen­
tial or not. 
Charts, some going back years, are kept of the various relationships between 
one expiration month and another. Spread traders often use these historical charts to 
determine when to enter and exit intramarket spreads. These charts display the sea­
sonal tendencies that make the relationships between various contracts widen or 
shrink. Analysis of the fundamentals that cause the seasonal tendencies could also be 
motivation for establishing intramarket spreads. 
The margin required for intramarket spread trading (and some other types of 
futures spreads) is smaller than that required for speculative trading in the futures 
themselves. The reason for this is that spreads are considered less risky than outright 
positions in the futures. However, one can still make or lose a good deal of money in 
a spread - percentage-wise as well as in dollars - so it cannot be considered conser­
vative; it's just less risky than outright futures speculation. 
Example: Using the soybean spread from the example above, assume the speculative 
initial margin requirement is $1,700. Then, the spread margin requirement might be 
$500. That is considerably less than one would have to put up as initial margin if each 
side of the spread had to be margined separately, a situation that would require 
$3,400. 
In the previous example, it was shown that the soybean spread had the poten­
tial to widen as much as 100 points ($1.00), a move that would be worth $5,000 if it 
===== PDF page index 749 =====
700 Part V: Index Options and Futures 
occurred. While it is unlikely that the spread would actually widen to historic highs, 
it is certainly possible that it could widen 25 or 30 cents, a profit of $1,250 to $1,500. 
That is certainly high leverage on a $500 investment over a short time period, 
so one must classify spreading as a risk strategy. 
INTERMARKET FUTURES SPREADS 
Another type of futures spread is one in which one buys futures contracts in one mar­
ket and sells futures contracts in another, probably related, market. When the futures 
spread is transacted in two different markets, it is known as an intermarket spread. 
Intermarket spreads are just as popular as intramarket spreads. 
One type of intermarket spread involves directly related markets. Examples 
include spreads between currency futures on two different international currencies; 
between financial futures on two different bond, note, or bill contracts; or between a 
commodity and its products - oil, unleaded gasoline, and heating oil, for example. 
Example: Interest rates have been low in both the United States and Japan. As a 
result, both currencies are depressed with respect to the European currencies, where 
interest rates remain high. A trader believes that interest rates will become more uni­
form worldwide, causing the Japanese yen to appreciate with respect to the German 
mark. 
However, since he is not sure whether Japanese rates will move up or German 
rates will move down, he is reluctant to take an outright position in either currency. 
Rather, he decides to utilize an intermarket spread to implement his trading idea. 
Assume he establishes the spread at the following prices: 
Buy I June yen future: 77.00 
Sell I June mark future: 60.00 
This is an initial differential of 17.00 between the two currency futures. He is 
hoping for the differential to get larger. The dollar trading terms are the same for 
both futures: One point of movement (from 60.00 to 61.00, for example) is worth 
$1,250. His profit and loss potential would therefore be: 
Spread Differential 
al a Later Date Profit/Loss 
14.00 $3,750 
16.00 - $1,250 
18.00 + 1,250 
20.00 + 3,750 
===== PDF page index 750 =====
Chapter 35: Futures Option Strategies for Futures Spreads 701 
In some cases, the exchanges recognize frequently traded intermarket spreads 
as being eligible for reduced margin requirements. That is, the exchange recognizes 
that the two futures are hedges against one another if one is sold and the other is 
bought. 
These spreads between currencies, called cross-currency spreads, are so heavi­
ly traded that there are other specific vehicles - both futures and warrants - that 
allow the speculator to trade them as a single entity. Regardless, they serve as a prime 
example of an intermarket spread when the two futures are used. 
In the example above, assume the outright speculative margin for a position in 
either currency future is $1,700 per contract. Then, the margin for this spread would 
probably be nearly $1,700 as well, equal to the speculative margin for one side of the 
spread. This position is thus recognized as a spread position for margin purposes. The 
margin treatment isn't as favorable as for the intramarket spread (see the earlier soy­
bean example), but the spread margin is still only one-half of what one would have to 
advance as initial margin if both sides of the spread had to be margined separately. 
Other intermarket spreads are also eligible for reduced margin requirements, 
although at first glance they might not seem to be as direct a hedge as the two cur­
rencies above were. 
Example: A common intermarket spread is the TED spread, which consists of 
Treasury bill futures on one side and Eurodollar futures on the other. Treasury bills 
represent the safest investment there is; they are guaranteed. Eurodollars, however, 
are not insured, and therefore represent a less safe investment. Consequently, 
Eurodollars yield more than Treasury bills. How much more is the key, because as 
the yield differential expands or shrinks, the spread between the prices of T-bill 
futures and Eurodollar futures expands or shrinks as well. In essence, the yield dif­
ferential is small when there is stability and confidence in the financial markets, 
because uninsured deposits and insured deposits are not that much different in times 
of financial certainty. However, in times of financial uncertainty and instability, the 
spread widens because the uninsured depositors require a comparatively higher yield 
for the higher risk they are taking. 
Assume the outright initial margin for either the T-bill future or the Eurodollar 
future is $800 per contract. The margin for the TED spread, however, is only $400. 
Thus, one is able to trade this spread for only one-fourth of the amount of margin 
that would be required to margin both sides separately. 
The reason that the margin is more favorable is that there is not a lot of volatil­
ity in this spread. Historically, it has ranged between about 0.30 and 1.70. In both 
futures contracts, one cent (0.01) of movement is worth $25. Thus, the entire 140-
cent historic range of the spread only represents $3,500 (140 x $25). 
( 
===== PDF page index 751 =====
702 Part V: Index Options and Futures 
More will be said later about the TED spread when the application of futures 
options to intermarket spreads is discussed. Since there is a liquid option market on 
both futures, it is sometimes more logical to establish the spread using options 
instead of futures. 
One other comment should be made regarding the TED spread: It has carry­
ing cost. That is, if one buys the spread and holds it, the spread will shrink as time 
passes, causing a small loss to the holder. When interest rates are low, the carrying 
cost is small (about 0.05 for 3 months). It would be larger if short-term rates rose. 
The prices in Table 35-1 show that the spread is more costly for longer-term con­
tracts. 
TABLE 35-1. 
Carrying costs of the TED spread. 
Month T-Bill Future 
March 96.27 
June 96.15 
September 95.90 
Eurodollar Future 
95.86 
95.69 
95.39 
TED Spread 
0.41 
0.46 
0.51 
Many intermarket spreads have some sort of carrying cost built into them; the 
spreader should be aware of that fact, for it may figure into his profitability. 
One final, and more complex, example of an intermarket spread is the crack 
spread. There are two major areas in which a basic commodity is traded, as well as 
two of its products: crude oil, unleaded gasoline, and heating oil; or soybeans, soy­
bean oil, and soybean meal. A crack spread involves trading all three - the base com­
modity and both byproducts. 
Example: The crack spread in oil consists of buying two futures contracts for crude 
oil and selling one contract each for heating oil and unleaded gasoline. 
The units of trading are not the same for all three. The crude oil future is a con­
tract for 1,000 barrels of oil; it is traded in units of dollars per barrel, so a $1 increase 
in oil prices from $18.00 to $19.00, say - is worth $1,000 to the futures contract. 
Heating oil and unleaded gasoline futures contracts have similar terms, but they are 
different from crude oil. Each of these futures is for 42,000 gallons of the product, 
and they are traded in cents. So, a one-cent move - gasoline going from 60 cents a 
gallon to 61 cents a gallon - is worth $420. This information is summarized in Table 
35-2 by showing how much a unit change in price is worth. 
===== PDF page index 752 =====
Chapter 35: Futures Option Strategies for Futures Spreads 
TABLE 35-2. 
Terms of oil production contract. 
Contract 
Crude Oil 
Unleaded Gasoline 
Heating Oil 
Initial 
Price 
18.00 
.6000 
.5500 
Subsequent 
Price 
19.00 
.6100 
.5600 
The following formula is generally used for the oil crack spread: 
Crack= (Unleaded gasoline + Heating oil) x 42 - 2 x Crude 
2 
(.6000 + .5500) X 42 - 2 X 18.00 = 
2 
= (48.3 - 36)/2 
= 6.15 
703 
Gain in 
Dollars 
$1,000 
$ 420 
$ 420 
Some traders don't use the divisor of 2 and, therefore, would arrive at a value 
of 12.30 with the above data. 
In either case, the spreader can track the history of this spread and will attempt 
to buy oil and sell the other two, or vice versa, in order to attempt to make an over­
all profit as the three products move. Suppose a spreader felt that the products were 
too expensive with respect to crude oil prices. He would then implement the spread 
in the following manner: 
Buy 2 March crude oil futures @ 18.00 
Sell 1 March heating oil future @ 0.5500 
Sell l March unleaded gasoline future @ 0.6000 
Thus, the crack spread was at 6.15 when he entered the position. Suppose that 
he was right, and the futures prices subsequently changed to the following: 
March crude oil futures: 18.50 
March unleaded gas futures: .6075 
March heating oil futures: .5575 
The profit is shown in Table 35-3. 
===== PDF page index 753 =====
704 
TABLE 35-3. 
Profit and loss of crack spread. 
Contract 
2 March Crude 
1 March Unleaded 
1 March Heating Oil 
Net Profit (before commissions) 
Initial 
Price 
18.00 
.6000 
.5500 
Part V: Index Options and Futures 
Subsequent 
Price 
18.50 
.6075 
.5575 
Gain in 
Dollars 
+ $1,000 
- $ 315 
- $ 315 
+ $ 370 
One can calculate that the crack spread at the new prices has shrunk to 5.965. 
Thus, the spreader was correct in predicting that the spread would narrow, and he 
profited. 
Margin requirements are also favorable for this type of spread, generally being 
slightly less than the speculative requirement for two contracts of crude oil. 
The above examples demonstrate some of the various intermarket spreads that 
are heavily watched and traded by futures spreaders. They often provide some of the 
most reliable profit situations without requiring one to predict the actual direction of 
the market itself. Only the differential of the spread is important. 
One should not assume that all intermarket spreads receive favorable margin 
treatment. Only those that have traditional relationships do. 
USING FUTURES OPTIONS IN FUTURES SPREADS 
After viewing the above examples, one can see that futures spreads are not the same 
as what we typically know as option spreads. However, option contracts may be use­
ful in futures spreading strategies. They can often provide an additional measure of 
profit potential for very little additional risk. This is true for both intramarket and 
intermarket spreads. 
The futures option calendar spread is discussed first. The calendar spread with 
futures options is not the same as the calendar spread with stock or index options. In 
fact, it may best be viewed as an alternative to the intramarket futures spread rather 
than as an option spread strategy. 
CALENDAR SPREADS 
A calendar spread with futures options would still be constructed in the familiar 
manner - buy the May call, sell the March call with the same striking price. However, 
===== PDF page index 754 =====
Chapter 35: Futures Option Strategies for Futures Spreads 705 
there is a major difference between the futures option calendar spread and the stock 
option calendar spread. That difference is that a calendar spread using futures 
options involves two separate underlying instruments, while a calendar spread using 
stock options does not. When one buys the May soybean 600 call and sells the March 
soybean 600 call, he is buying a call on the May soybean futures contract and selling 
a call on the March soybean futures contract. Thus, the futures option calendar 
spread involves two separate, but related, underlying futures contracts. However, if 
one buys the IBM May 100 call and sells the IBM March 100 call, both calls are on 
the same underlying instrument, IBM. This is a major difference between the two 
strategies, although both are called "calendar spreads." 
To the stock option trader who is used to visualizing calendar spreads, the 
futures option variety may confound him at first. For example, a stock option trader 
may conclude that if he can buy a four-month call for 5 points and sell a two-month 
call for 2 points, he has a good calendar spread possibility. Such an analysis is mean­
ingless with futures options. If one can buy the May soybean 600 call for 5 and sell 
the March soybean 600 call for 3, is that a good spread or not? It's impossible to tell, 
unless you know the relationship between May and March soybean futures contracts. 
Thus, in order to analyze the futures option calendar spread, one must not only ana­
lyze the options' relationship, but the two futures contracts' relationship as well. 
Simply stated, when one establishes a futures option calendar spread, he is not only 
spreading time, as he does with stock options, he is also spreading the relationship 
between the underlying futures. 
Example: A trader notices that near-term options in soybeans are relatively more 
expensive than longer-term options. He thinks a calendar spread might make sense, 
as he can sell the overpriced near-term calls and buy the relatively cheaper longer­
term calls. This is a good situation, considering the theoretical value of the options 
involved. He establishes the spread at the following prices: 
Soybean Trading 
Contract Initial Price Position 
March 600 call 14 Sell 1 
May 600 call 21 Buy 1 
March future 594 none 
May future 598 none 
The May/March 600 call calendar spread is established for 7 points debit. 
March expiration is two months away. At the current time, the May futures are trad­
ing at a 4-point premium to March futures. The spreader figures that if March 
===== PDF page index 755 =====
706 Part V: Index Options and Futures 
futures are approximately unchanged at expiration of the March options, he should 
profit handsomely, because the March calls are slightly overpriced at the current 
time, plus they will decay at a faster rate than the May calls over the next two months. 
Suppose that he is correct and March futures are unchanged at expiration of the 
March options. This is still no guarantee of profit, because one must also determine 
where May futures are trading. If the spread between May and March futures 
behaves poorly (May declines with respect to March), then he might still lose money. 
Look at the following table to see how the futures spread between March and May 
futures affects the profitability of the calendar spread. The calendar spread cost 7 
debit when the futures spread was +4 initially. 
Futures Calendar 
Futures Prices Spread May 600 Call Spread 
March/May Price Price Profit/Loss 
594/570 -24 4 -3 cents 
594/580 -14 61/2 _1/2 
594/590 -4 10 +3 
594/600 +6 141/2 +71/2 
Thus, the calendar spread could lose money even with March futures 
unchanged, as in the top two lines of the table. It also could do better than expected 
if the futures spread widens, as in the bottom line of the table. 
The profitability of the calendar spread is heavily linked to the futures spread 
price. In the above example, it was possible to lose money even though the March 
futures contract was unchanged in price from the time the calendar spread was 
initially established. This would never happen with stock options. If one placed a 
calendar spread on IBM and the stock were unchanged at the expiration of the near­
term option, the spread would make money virtually all of the time ( unless implied 
volatility had shrunk dramatically). 
The futures option calendar spreader is therefore trading two spreads at once. 
The first one has to do with the relative pricing differentials (implied volatilities, for 
example) of the two options in question, as well as the passage of time. The second 
one is the relationship between the two underlying futures contracts. As a result, it is 
difficult to draw the ordinary profit picture. Rather, one must approach the problem 
in this manner: 
1. Use the horizontal axis to represent the futures spread price at the expiration of 
the near-term option. 
===== PDF page index 756 =====
Chapter 35: Futures Option Strategies for Futures Spreads 707 
2. Draw several profit curves, one for each price of the near-term future at near­
term expiration. 
Example: Expanding on the above example, this method is demonstrated here. 
Figure 35-1 shows how to approach the problem. The horizontal axis depicts 
the spread between March and May soybean futures at the expiration of the March 
futures options. The vertical axis represents the profit and loss to be expected from 
the calendar spread, as it always does. 
The major difference between this profit graph and standard ones is that there 
are now several sets of profit curves. A separate one is drawn for each price of the 
March futures that one wants to consider in his analysis. The previous example 
showed the profitability for only one price of the March futures - unchanged at 594. 
However, one cannot rely on the March futures to remain unchanged, so he must 
view the profitability of the calendar spread at various March futures prices. 
The data that is plotted in the figure is summarized in Table 35-4. Several things 
are readily apparent. First, if the futures spread improves in price, the calendar 
spread will generally make money. These are the points on the far right of the figure 
and on the bottom line of Table 35-4. Second, if the futures spread behaves miser-
FIGURE 35-1. 
Soybean futures calendar spreads, at March expiration. 
gj 
20 
16 
12 
.3 8 
::.: 
0 
ct 4 
0 
-8 
March/May Spread 
March =604 
March =594 
March= 614 
March =584 
March= 574 