
===== PDF page index 864 =====
Chapter 38: The Distribution of Stock Prices 807 
THE MONTE CARLO PROBABILITY CALCULATOR 
Up to this point, the calculators we have discussed are subject to the limitations 
described earlier - mainly, that they rely heavily on one's volatility estimate, that they 
assume the volatility will remain constant over time, and that they assume a lognor­
mal distribution. The early part of this chapter was spent explaining that the lognor­
mal distribution is not the real distribution that stock prices adhere to. So, what we'd 
like to see in a probability calculator is one that could adjust for various volatility sce­
narios as time passed and one in which the assumed distribution of stock prices was 
not lognormal. 
When one starts to make these sorts of assumptions, I do not believe there is a 
single formula that can be derived for the probability calculations. Rather, what is 
known as a Monte Carlo simulation must be undertaken. Essentially, one "tells" the 
computer what he is trying to simulate. It could be any number of things in real life, 
perhaps the rocket engine components in a NASA space shuttle, or the operation of 
an internal combustion engine, or the movement of a stock. As long as the process 
can be described, it can be simulated by a computer. Then, the computer can run a 
large number of those simulations to determine the answers to such things as "What 
is the failure rate of the NASA engine components," or "How long can the internal 
combustion engine go without an oil change," or "What is the probability of the stock 
trading at a certain target price?" The Monte Carlo simulation technique can be 
thought of as letting the computer run through the simulation a lot of times and 
counting how many times a certain outcome occurs. If the number of trials (simula­
tions) is large enough and the model is good enough, then the resulting count divid­
ed by the number of trials undertaken is a good probability estimate of the said event 
occurring. The reason one runs a lot of trials is that over a large number of trials, the 
frequency with which an event occurs will approximate the actual probability of its 
occurrence for a single trial - the single trial being your trade, for example. 
The next three paragraphs describe the general process necessary for con­
structing a stock probability calculator using a Monte Carlo simulation. Again, this is 
fairly technical, so if the reader is not interested in the background behind the math­
ematics, then skip ahead three paragraphs. In the case of a stock probability calcula­
tor, the Monte Carlo simulation can be undertaken as follows. 
We know what the distribution of stock prices looks like. The fat tails can be 
built into the distribution if one wants to simulate real life. See Figure 38-1 for both 
the lognormal distribution and the actual distribution. It's a simple matter to tell the 
computer this information. For example, recall that 2.5 million points went into mak­
ing up Figure 38-1. In the actual distribution in Figure 38-1, about 92,000 (or 3.68%) 
===== PDF page index 865 =====
808 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
of them resulted in the stock being unchanged. Also, only about 2,500 or them, or 
1110th of one percent, resulted in a move of-4.0 standard deviations or more. Those 
percentages, along with all of the others, would be built into the computer, so that 
the total distribution accounts for 100% of all possible stock movements. 
Then, we tell the computer to allow a stock to move randomly in accordance 
with whatever volatility the user has input. So, there would be a fairly large proba­
bility that it wouldn't move very far on a given day, and a very small probability that 
it would move three or more standard deviations. Of course, with the fat tail distri­
bution, there would be a larger probability of a movement of three or more standard 
deviations than there would be with the regular lognormal distribution. The Monte 
Carlo simulation progresses through the given number of trading days, moving the 
stock cumulatively as time passes. If the stock hits the break-even price, that partic­
ular simulation can be terminated and the next one begun. At the end of all the tri­
als (100,000 perhaps), the number in which the upside target was touched is divided 
by the total number of trials to give the probability estimate. 
Is it really worth all this extra trouble to evaluate these more complicated prob­
ability distributions? It seems so. Consider the following example: 
Example: Suppose that a trader is considering selling naked puts on XYZ stock, 
which is currently trading at a price of 80. He wants to sell the November 60 puts, 
which expire in two months. Although XYZ is a fairly volatile stock, he feels that he 
wouldn't mind owning it if it were put to him. However, he would like to see the puts 
expire worthless. Suppose the following information is available to him via the vari­
ous probability calculators: 
Simple "end point" probability of XYZ < 60 at expiration: 10% 
Probability that XYZ ever trades < 60 (using the lognormal distribution) 20% 
Probability that XYZ ever trades < 60 (using the fat tail distribution): 22% 
If the chances of the put never needing attention were truly only 10%, this trader 
would probably sell the puts naked and feel quite comfortable that he had a trade 
that he wouldn't have to worry too much about later on. However, if the true proba­
bility that the put will need attention is 22%, then he might not take the trade. Many 
naked option sellers try to sell options that have only probabilities of 15% or less of 
potentially becoming troublesome. 
Hence, the choice of which probability calculation he uses can make a differ­
ence in whether or not a trade is established. 
Other strategies lend themselves quite well to probability analysis as well. 
Credit spreaders - sellers of out-of-the-money put spreads - usually attempt to quan­
tify the probability of having to take defensive action. Any action to adjust or remove 
===== PDF page index 866 =====
Chapter 38: The Distribution of Stock Prices 809 
a deeply out-of-the-money put credit spread usually destroys most or all of its prof­
itability, so an accurate initial assessment of the probabilities of having to make such 
an adjustment is important. 
Option buyers, too, would benefit from the use of a more accurate probability 
estimate. This is especially true for neutral strategies, such as straddle or strangle 
buying, when the trader is interested in the chances of the stock being able to move 
far enough to hit one or the other of the straddle's break-even points at some time 
during the life of the straddle. 
The Monte Carlo probability calculation can be expanded to include other sorts 
of distributions. In the world of statistics, there are many distributions that define ran­
dom patterns. The lognormal distribution is but one of them (although it is the one 
that most closely follows stock prices movements in general). Also, there is a school of 
thought that says that each stock's individual price distribution patterns should be ana­
lyzed when looking at strategies on that stock, as opposed to using a general stock 
price distribution accumulated over the entire market. There is much debate about 
that, because an individual stock's trading pattern can change abruptly just consider 
any of the Internet stocks in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Thus, a probability esti­
mate based on a single stock's behavior, even if that behavior extends back several 
years, might be too unreliable a statistic upon which to base a probability estimate. 
In summary, then, one should use a probability calculator before taking an 
option position, even an outright option buy. Perhaps straight stock traders should 
use a probability calcutor as well. In doing so, though, one should be aware of the 
limitations of the estimate: It is heavily biased by the volatility estimate that is input 
and by the assumption of what distribution the underlying instrument will adhere to 
during the life of the position. While neither of those limitations can be overcome 
completely, one can mitigate the problems by using a conservative volatility estimate. 
Also, he can look at the results of the probability calculation under several distribu­
tions (perhaps lognormal, fat tail, and the distribution using only the past price 
behavior of the underlying instrument in question) and see how they differ. In that 
case, he would at least have a feeling for what could happen during the life of the 
option position. 
EXPECTED RETURN 
The concept of expected return was described in the chapter on mathematical appli­
cations. In short, expected return is a position's expected profit divided by its invest­
ment ( or expected investment if the investment varies with stock price, as in a naked 
option position or a futures position). The crucial component, though, is expected 
profit. 
===== PDF page index 867 =====
810 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Expected profit is computed by calculating the profitability of a position at a 
certain stock price times the probability of the stock being at that price, and summing 
that multiple over all possible stock prices. When the concept was first introduced, 
the "probability of the stock being at that price" was given as what we now know is 
the "endpoint" probability. In reality, a much better measure of the expected profit 
of a position can be obtained by using one of the more advanced probability estima­
tion models presented above. 
In generalized expected return studies done using the fat tails Monte Carlo sim­
ulation, certain general conclusions can be drawn about some strategies. 
• A bull spread is an inferior strategy when the options are fairly priced, no matter 
which distribution is assumed. This more or less agrees with observations that 
have been made previously regarding the disappointments that traders often 
encounter when using vertical spreads. 
• While covered writing might seem superior to stock ownership under the log­
normal distribution, the two are about equal under a fat tail distribution. 
• Most startling, though, is the fact that option buying strategies fare much, much 
better under a fat tail distribution than a lognormal one. This most clearly 
demonstrates the "power" of the fat tail distribution: A limited-risk investment 
with unlimited profit potential can be expected to perform very well if the fat tails 
are allowed for. 
Using the lognormal distribution more or less represents the conventional wisdom 
regarding option strategies - the one that many brokers promote: "Don't buy options, 
don't mess with spreads, either buy stocks or do covered call writes." The fat tail dis­
tribution column stands much of that advice on its head. In real life (as demonstrat­
ed by the fat tail distribution), strategies with limited profit potential and unlimited 
or large risk potential are inferior strategies. 
One should be aware that the phrase "expected return" is used in many quasi­
sophisticated option analyses (and even in analyses not using options). Many 
investors accept these "returns" on blind faith, figuring that if they're generated by a 
computer, they must be correct. In reality, they may be not be representative, even 
for comparisons. 
SUMMARY 
This chapter has demonstrated that probability analysis is an inexact science, because 
markets behave in ways that are very difficult to describe mathematically. However, 
probability analysis is also necessary for the option strategist; without it he would be 
===== PDF page index 868 =====
Chapter 38: The Distribution of Stock Prices 811 
in the dark as to the likelihood of profitable outcomes for his strategy. Overall, in a 
diversified set of positions, the option strategist should use the fat tail distribution in 
a Monte Carlo simulation to estimate probabilities. However, if that is not available, 
he can use the normal or lognormal distribution with the proviso that he understands 
it is not "gospel." He should require ve:ry stringent criteria on any strategies that are 
antivolatility strategies, such as naked option writing of stock options, for there is a 
greater than normal chance of a large move by the underlying, especially if the 
underlying is stock. 
The sophisticated trader may want to view his probabilities in the light of more 
than one proposed distribution of prices. Of course, this type of analysis ( using sev­
eral distributions) puts the onus on the investor to choose the distribution that he 
wants to use in order to analyze his investment. However, such an approach should 
be extremely illustrative in that he can compare returns from different strategies and 
have a reasonable expectation as to which ones might perform the best under differ­
ent market conditions. 
===== PDF page index 869 =====
CHAPTER 39 
Volatility Trading Techniques 
The previous three chapters laid the foundation for volatility trading. In this chapter, 
the actual application of the technique will be described. It should be understood 
that volatility trading is both an art and a science. It's a science to the extent that one 
must be rigorous about determining historical volatility or implied volatility, calculat­
ing probabilities, and so forth. However, given the vagaries of those measurements 
that were described in some detail in the previous chapters, volatility trading is also 
something of an art. Just as two fundamental analysts with the same information 
regarding earnings, sales projection, and so on might have two different opinions 
about a stock's fortunes, so also can two volatility traders disagree about the potential 
for movement in a stock. 
However, volatility traders do agree on the approach. It is based on comparing 
today's implied volatility with what one expects volatility to do in the future. As noted 
previously, one's expectations for volatility might be based on volatility charts, pat­
terns of historical volatility and implied volatility, or something as complicated as a 
GAR CH forecasting model. None of them guarantees success. However, we do know 
that volatility tends to trade in a range in the long run. Therefore, the approach that 
traders agree upon is this: If implied volatility is "low," buy it. If it's "high," sell it with 
caution. So simple: Buy low, sell high (not necessarily in that order). The theory 
behind volatility trading is that it's easier to buy low and sell high (or at least to deter­
mine what's "low" and "high") when one is speaking about volatility, than it is to do 
the same thing when one is talking about stock prices. 
Most of the time, implied volatility will not be significantly high or low on any 
particular stock, futures contract, or index. Therefore, the volatility trader will have 
little interest in most stocks on any given day. This is especially true of the big-cap 
stocks, the ones whose options are most heavily traded. There are so many traders 
812 
===== PDF page index 870 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 813 
watching the situation for those stocks that they will rarely let volatility get to the 
extremes that one would consider "too high" or "too low." Yet, with the large num­
ber of optionable stocks, futures, and indices that exist, there are always some that 
are out of line, and that's where the independent volatility trader will concentrate 
his efforts. 
Once a volatility extreme has been uncovered, there are different methods of 
trading it. Some traders - market-makers and short-term traders - are just looking 
for very fleeting trades, and expect volatility to fall back into line quickly after an 
aberrant move. Others prefer more of a position traders' approach: attempting to 
determine volatility extremes that are so far out of line with accepted norms that it 
will probably take some time to move back into line. Obviously, the trader's own sit­
uation will dictate, to a certain extent, which strategy he pursues. Things such as 
commission rates, capital requirements, and risk tolerance will determine whether 
one is more of a short-term trader or a position trader. The techniques to be 
described in this chapter apply to both methods, although the emphasis will be on 
position trading. 
TWO WAYS VOLATILITY PREDICTIONS CAN BE WRONG 
When traders determine the implied volatility of the options on any particular under­
lying instrument, they may generally be correct in their predictions; that is, implied 
volatility will actually be a fairly good estimate of forthcoming volatility. However, 
when they're wrong, they can actually be wrong in two ways: either in the outright 
prediction of volatility or in the path of their volatility predictions. Let's discuss both. 
When they're wrong about the absolute level of volatility, that merely means that 
implied volatility is either "too low" or "too high." In retrospect, one could only make 
that assessment, of course, after having seen what actual volatility turned out to be 
over the life of the option. The second way they could be wrong is by making the 
implied volatility on some of the options on a particular underlying instrument much 
cheaper or more expensive than other options on that same underlying instrument. 
This is called a volatility skew and it is usually an incorrect prediction about the way 
the underlying will perform during the life of the options. 
The rest of this chapter will be divided into two main parts, then. The first part 
will deal with volatility from the viewpoint of the absolute level of implied volatility 
being "wrong" (which we'll call "trading the volatility prediction"), and the second 
part will deal with trading the volatility skew. 
===== PDF page index 871 =====
814 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
TRADING THE VOLATILITY PREDICTION 
The volatility trader must have some way of determining when implied volatility is 
sufficiently out of line that it warrants a trade. Then he must decide what trade to 
establish. Furthermore, as with any strategy- especially option strategies - follow-up 
action is important too. We will not be introducing any new strategies, per se, in this 
chapter. Those strategies have already been laid out in the previous chapters of this 
book. However, we will briefly review important points about those strategies and 
their follow-up actions where it is appropriate. 
First, one must try to find situations in which implied volatility is out of line. 
That is not the end of the analysis, though. After that, one needs to do some proba­
bility work and needs to see how the underlying has behaved in the past. Other fine­
tuning measures are often useful, too. These will all be described in this chapter. 
DETERMINING WHEN VOLATILITY IS OUT OF LINE 
There is much disagreement among volatility traders regarding the best method to use 
for determining if implied volatility is "out ofline." Most favor comparing implied with 
historical volatility. However, it was shown two chapters ago that implied volatility is 
not necessarily a good predictor of historical volatility. Yet this approach cannot be dis­
carded; however it must be used judiciously. Another approach is to compare today's 
implied volatility with where it has been in the past. This concept relies heavily on the 
concept of the percentile of implied volatility. Finally, there is the approach of trying 
to "read" the charts of implied and historical volatility. This is actually something akin 
to what GARCH tries to do, but on a short-term horizon. So the approaches are: 
1. Compare implied volatility to its own past levels (percentile approach). 
2. Compare implied volatility to historical volatility. 
3. Interpret the chart of volatility. 
In addition, we will examine two lesser-used methods: comparing current levels of 
historical volatility to past measures of historical volatility, and finally, using only a 
probability calculator and trading the situation that has the best probabilities of 
success. 
THE PERCENTILE APPROACH 
In this author's opinion, there is much merit in the percentile approach. When one says 
that volatility tends to trade in a range, which is the basic premise behind volatility trad-
===== PDF page index 872 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 815 
ing, he is generally talking about implied volatility. Thus, it makes sense to know where 
implied volatility is within the range of the past readings of implied volatility. If volatil­
ity is low with respect to where it usually trades, then we can say the options are cheap. 
Conversely, if it's high with respect to those past values, then we can say the options are 
expensive. These conclusions do not draw on historical volatility. 
The percentile of implied volatility is generally used to describe just where the 
current implied volatility reading lies with respect to its past values. The "implied 
volatility" reading that is being used in this case is the composite reading - the one 
that takes into account all the options on an underlying instrument, weighting them 
by their distance in- or out-of-the-money (at-the-money gets more weight) and also 
weighting them by their trading volume. This technique has been referred to many 
times and was first described in Chapter 28 on mathematical applications. That com­
posite implied volatility reading can be stored in a database for each underlying 
instrument every day. Such databases are available for purchase from firms that spe­
cialize in option data. Also, snapshots of such data are available to members of 
www.optionstrategist.com. 
In general, most underlying instruments would have a composite implied 
volatility reading somewhere near the 50th percentile on any given day. However, it 
is not uncommon to see some underlyings with percentile readings near zero or 100% 
on a given day. These are the ones that would interest a volatility trader. Those with 
readings in the 10th percentile or less, say, would be considered "cheap"; those in the 
90th percentile or higher would be considered expensive. 
In reality, the percentile of implied volatility is going to be affected by what the 
broad market is doing. For example, during a severe market slide, implied volatilities 
will increase across the board. Then, one may find a large number of stocks whose 
options are in the 90th percentile or higher. Conversely, there have been other times 
when overall implied volatility has declined substantially: 1993, for example, and the 
summer of 2001, for another. At those times, we often find a great number of stocks 
whose options reside in the 10th percentile of implied volatility or lower. The point 
is that the distribution of percentile readings is a dynamic thing, not something stat­
ic like a lognormal distribution. Yes, perhaps over a long period of time and taking 
into account a great number of cases, we might find that the percentiles of implied 
volatility are normally distributed, but not on any given day. 
The trader has some discretion over this percentile calculation. Foremost, he 
must decide how many days of past history he wants to use in determining the per­
centiles. There are about 255 trading days in a year. So, if he wanted a two-year his­
tory, he would record the percentile of today's composite implied volatility with 
respect to the 510 daily readings over the past two years. This author typically uses 
===== PDF page index 873 =====
816 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
600 days of implied volatility history for the purpose of determining percentiles, but 
a case could be made for other lengths of time. The purpose is to use enough implied 
volatility history to give one a good perspective. Then, a reading of the 10th per­
centile or the 90th percentile will truly be significant and would therefore be a good 
starting point in determining whether the options are cheap or expensive. 
In addition to the actual percentile, the trader should also be aware of the width 
of the implied volatility distribution. This was discussed in an earlier chapter, but 
essentially the concept is this: If the first percentile is an implied volatility of 40% and 
the 100th percentile is an implied volatility of 45%, then that entire range is so nar­
row as to be meaningless in terms of whether one could classify the options as cheap 
or expensive. 
The advantage of buying options in a low percentile of implied volatility is to 
give oneself two ways to make money: one, via movement in the underlying (if a 
straddle were owned, for example), and two, by an increase in implied volatility. That 
is, if the options were to return to the 50th percentile of implied volatility, the volatil­
ity trader who has bought "cheap" options should expect to make money from that 
movement as well. That can only happen if the 50th percentile and the 10th per­
centile are sufficiently far apart to allow for an increase in the price of the option to 
be meaningful. Perhaps a good rule of thumb is this: If the option rises from the cur­
rent (low) percentile reading to the 50th percentile in a month, will the increase in 
implied volatility be equal to or greater than the time decay over that period? 
Alternatively stated, with all other things being equal, will the option be trading at 
the same or a greater price in a month, if implied volatility rises to the 50th percentile 
at the end of that time? If so, then the width of the range of implied volatilities is 
great enough to produce the desired results. 
The attractiveness to this method for determining if implied volatility is out of 
line is that the trader is "forced" to buy options that are cheap ( or to sell options that 
are expensive), on a relative basis. Even though historical volatility has not been taken 
into consideration, it will be later on when the probability calculators are brought to 
bear. There is no guarantee, of course, that implied volatility will move toward the 
50th percentile while the position is in place, but if it does, that will certainly be an 
aid to the position. 
In effect this method is measuring what the option trading public is "thinking" 
about volatility and comparing it with what they've thought in the past. Since the pub­
lic is wrong (about prices as well as volatility) at major turning points, it is valid to want 
to be long volatility when "everyone else" has pushed it down to depressed levels. The 
converse may not necessarily be true: that we would want to be short volatility when 
everyone else has pushed it up to extremely high levels. The caveat in that case is that 
===== PDF page index 874 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 817 
someone may have inside information that justifies expensive options. This is another 
reason why selling volatility can be difficult: You may be dealing with far less infor­
mation than those who are actually making the implied volatility high. 
COMPARING IMPLIED AND HISTORICAL VOLATILITY 
The most common way that traders determine which options are cheap or expensive 
is by comparing the current composite implied volatility with various historical 
volatility measures. However, just because this is the conventional wisdom does not 
necessarily mean that this method is the preferred one for determining which options 
are best for volatility trades. In this author's opinion, it is inferior to the percentile 
method (comparing implied to past measures of implied), but it does have its merits. 
The theory behind using this method is that it is a virtual certainty that implied and 
historical volatility will eventually converge with each other. So, if one establishes 
volatility trading positions when they are far apart, there is supposedly an advantage 
there. 
However, this argument has plenty of holes in it. First of all, there is no guar­
antee that the two will converge in a timely manner, for example, before the options 
in the trader's position can become profitable. Historical and implied volatility often 
remain fairly far apart for weeks at a time. 
Second, even if the convergence does occur, it doesn't necessarily mean one will 
make money. As an example, consider the case in which implied volatility is 40% and 
historical volatility is 60%. That's quite a difference, so you'd want to buy volatility. 
Furthermore, suppose the two do converge. Does that mean you'll make money? No, 
it does not. What if they converge and meet at 40%? Or, worse yet, at 30%? You'd 
most certainly lose in those cases as the stock slowed down while your options lost 
time value. 
Another problem with this method is that implied volatility is not necessarily 
low when it is bought, nor high when it is sold. Consider the example just cited. We 
merely knew that implied volatility was 40% and that historical volatility was 60%. We 
had no perspective on whether 40% was high, medium, or low. Thus, it is also nec­
essary to see what the percentile of implied volatility is. If it turns out that 40% is a 
relatively high reading for implied volatility, as determined by looking at where 
implied volatility has been over the past couple of years, then we would probably not 
want to buy volatility in this situation, even though implied and historical volatility 
have a large discrepancy between them. 
Many market-makers and floor traders use this approach. However, they are 
often looking for an option that is briefly mispriced, figuring that volatilities will 
===== PDF page index 875 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-
===== PDF page index 876 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-