
===== PDF page index 289 =====
262 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
As was stated earlier, it is necessary to have a computer to make an accurate analysis 
of all listed options. The average customer is forced to obtain such data from a bro­
kerage firm or data service. He should be sure that the list he is using conforms to 
the above-mentioned criteria. If the data service is ranking option purchases by how 
well the puts would do if each underlying stock fell by a fixed percentage (such as 5% 
or 10%), the list should be rejected because it is not incorporating the volatility of the 
underlying stock into its analysis. Also, if the list is based on holding the put purchase 
until expiration, the list should be rejected as well, because this is not a realistic 
assumption. There are enough reliable and sophisticated data services that one 
should not have to work with inferior analyses in today's option market. 
For those readers who are more mathematically advanced and have the com­
puter capability to construct their own analyses, the details of implementing an analy­
sis similar to the one described above are presented in Chapter 28, Mathematical 
Applications. An application of put purchases, combined with fixed-income securi­
ties, is described in Chapter 26, Buying Options and Treasury Bills. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
The put buyer can take advantage of strategies that are very similar to those the call 
buyer uses for follow-up action, either to lock in profits or to attempt to improve a 
losing situation. Before discussing these specific strategies, it should be stated again 
that it is rarely to the option buyer's benefit to exercise the option in order to liqui­
date. This precludes, of course, those situations in which the call buyer actually wants 
to own the stock or the put buyer actually wants to sell the stock. If, however, the 
option holder is merely looking to liquidate his position, the cost of stock commis­
sions makes exercising a prohibitive move. This is true even ifhe has to accept a price 
that is a slight discount from parity when he sells his option. 
LOCKING IN PROFITS 
The reader may recall that there were four strategies (perhaps "tactics" is a better 
word) for the call buyer with an unrealized profit. These same four tactics can be 
used with only slight variations by the put option buyer. Additionally, a fifth strategy 
can be employed when a stock has both listed puts and calls. 
After an underlying stock has moved down and the put buyer has a relatively 
substantial unrealized gain, he might consider taking one of the following actions: 
1. Sell the put and liquidate the position for a profit. 
2. Do nothing and continue to hold the put. 
===== PDF page index 290 =====
O.,,er 16: Put Option Buying 263 
3, Sell the in-the-money long put and use part of the proceeds to purchase out-of­
the-money puts. 
4. Create a spread by selling an out-of-the-money put against the one he currently 
holds. 
These are the same four tactics that were discussed earlier with respect to call buy­
ing. In the fifth tactic, the holder of a listed put who has an unrealized profit might 
consider buying a listed call to protect his position. 
Example: A speculator originally purchased an XYZ October 50 put for 2 points when 
the stock was 52. If the stock has now fallen to 45, the put might be worth 6 points, 
representing an unrealized gain of 4 points and placing the put buyer in a position to 
implement one of these five tactics. After some time has passed, with the stock at 45, 
an at-the-money October 45 put might be selling for 2 points. Table 16-3 summarizes 
the situation. If the trader merely liquidates his position by selling out the October 50 
put, he would realize a profit of 4 points. Since he is terminating the position, he can 
make neither more nor less than 4 points. This is the most conservative of the tactics, 
allowing no additional room for appreciation, but also eliminating any chance of los­
ing the accumulated profits. 
TABLE 16-3. 
Background table for profit alternatives. 
Original Trade Current Prices 
XYZ common: 52 XYZ common: 45 
Bought XYZ October 50 put at 2 XYZ October 50 put: 6 
XYZ October 45 put: 2 
If the trader does nothing, merely continuing to hold the October 50 put, he is 
taking an aggressive action. If the stock should reverse and rise back above 50 by 
expiration, he would lose everything. However, if the stock continues to fall, he could 
build up substantially larger profits. This is the only tactic that could eventually result 
in a loss at expiration. 
These two simple strategies - liquidating or doing nothing are the easiest 
alternatives. The remaining strategies allow one to attempt to achieve a balance 
between retaining built-up profits and generating even more profits. The third tactic 
that the speculator could use would be to sell the put that he is currently holding and 
===== PDF page index 291 =====
264 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
use some of the proceeds to purchase the October 45 put. The general idea in this 
tactic is to pull one's initial investment out of the market and then to increase the 
number of option contracts held by buying the out-of-the-money option. 
Example: The trader would receive 6 points from the sale of the October 50 put. He 
should take 2 points of this amount and put it back into his pocket, thus covering his 
initial investment. Then he could buy 2 October 45 puts at 2 points each with the 
remaining portion of the proceeds from the sale. He has no risk at expiration with this 
strategy, since he has recovered his initial investment. Moreover, if the underlying 
stock should continue to fall rapidly, he could profit handsomely because he has 
increased the number of put contracts that he holds. 
The fourth choice that the put holder has is to create a spread by selling the 
October 45 put against the October 50 that he currently holds. This would create a 
bear spread, technically. This type of spread is described in more detail later. For the 
time being, it is sufficient to understand what happens to the trader's risks and 
rewards by creating this spread. The sale of the October 45 put brings in 2 points, 
which covers the initial 2-point purchase cost of the October 50 put. Thus, his "cost" 
for this spread is nothing; he has no risk, except for commissions. If the underlying 
stock should rise above 50 by expiration, all the puts would expire worthless. (A put 
expires worthless when the underlying stock is above the striking price at expiration.) 
This would represent the worst case; he would recover nothing from the spread. If 
the stock should be below 45 at expiration, he would realize the maximum potential 
of the spread, which is 5 points. That is, no matter how far XYZ is below 45 at expi­
ration, the October 50 put will be worth 5 points more than the October 45 put, and 
the spread could thus be liquidated for 5 points. His maximum profit potential in the 
spread situation is 5 points. This tactic would be the best one if the underlying stock 
stabilized near 45 until expiration. 
To analyze the fifth strategy that the put holder could use, it is necessary to 
introduce a call option into the picture. 
Example: With XYZ at 45, there is an October 45 call selling for 3 points. The put 
holder could buy this call in order to limit his risk and still retain the potential for 
large future profits. If the trader buys the call, he will have the following position: 
Long l October 50 put C b' d t 5 . t 
l O b 5 all - om me cos : porn s Long cto er 4 c 
The total combined cost of this put and call combination is 5 points - 2 points were 
originally paid for the put, and now 3 points have been paid for the call. No matter 
where the underlying stock is at expiration, this combination will be worth at least 5 
===== PDF page index 292 =====
Gapter 16: Put Option Buying 265 
points. For example, if XYZ is at 46 at expiration, the put will be worth 4 and the call 
worth l; or if XYZ is at 48, the put will be worth 2 and the call worth 3. If the stock 
is above 50 or below 45 at expiration, the combination will be worth more than 5 
points. Thus, the trader has no risk in this combination, since he has paid 5 points for 
it and will be able to sell it for at least 5 points at expiration. In fact, if the underly­
ing stock continues to drop, the put will become more valuable and he could build 
up substantial profits. Moreover, if the underlying stock should reverse direction and 
climb substantially, he could still profit, because the call will then become valuable. 
This tactic is the best one to use if the underlying stock does not stabilize near 45, 
but instead makes a relatively dramatic move either up or down by expiration. The 
strategy of simultaneously owning both a put and a call is discussed in much greater 
detail in Chapter 23. It is introduced here merely for the purposes of the put buyer 
wanting to obtain protection of his unrealized profits. 
Each of these five strategies may work out to be the best one under a different 
set of circumstances. The ultimate result of each tactic is dependent on the direction 
that XYZ moves in the future. As was the case with call options, the spread tactic 
never turns out to be the worst tactic, although it is the best one only if the underly­
ing stock stabilizes. Tables 16-4 and 16-5 summarize the results the speculator could 
expect from invoking each of these five tactics. The tactics are: 
1. Liquidate - sell the long put for a profit and do not reinvest. 
2. Do nothing - continue to hold the long put. 
3. "Roll down" - sell the long put, pocket the initial investment, and invest the 
remaining proceeds in out-of-the-money puts at a lower strike. 
4. "Spread" - create a spread by selling the out-of-the-money put against the put 
already held. 
5. "Combine" create a combination by buying a call at a lower strike while con­
tinuing to hold the put. 
TABLE 16-4. 
Comparison of the five tactics. 
By expiration, if XYZ ... 
Continues to fall dramatically 
Falls moderately further 
Remains relatively unchanged 
Rises moderately 
Rises substantially 
the best strategy was ... 
"Roll down" 
Do nothing 
Spread 
Liquidate 
Combine 
and the worst 
strategy was ... 
Liquidate 
Combine 
Combine or "roll down" 
"Roll down" or do nothing 
Do nothing 
===== PDF page index 293 =====
266 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
TABLE 16-5. 
Results of adopting each of the five tactics. 
XYZ Price at "Roll Down" Do-Nothing Spread Liquidate Combine 
Expiration Profit Profit Profit Profit Profit 
30 + $3,000 (8) +$1,800 +$500 +$400 (W) +$1,500 
35 + 2,000 (8) + 1,300 + 500 + 400 (W) + 1,000 
41 + 800 (8) + 700 + 500 + 400 (W) + 400 
42 + 600 (8) + 600 (8) + 500 + 400 + 300 (W) 
43 + 400 + 500 (8) + 500 (8) + 400 + 200 (W) 
45 0(W) + 300 + 500 (8) + 400 0(W) 
46 0(W) + 200 + 400 (8) + 400 (8) O(W) 
48 0(W) 0(W) + 200 + 400 (8) 0(W) 
50 0 200 (W) 0 + 400 (8) 0 
54 0 200 (W) 0 + 400 (8) + 400 (8) 
60 0 200 (W) 0 + 400 + 1,000 (8) 
Note that each tactic is the best one under one of the scenarios, but that the spread 
tactic is never the worst of the five. The actual results of each tactic, using the figures 
from the example above, are depicted in Table 16-5, where B denotes best tactic and 
W denotes worst one. 
All the strategies are profitable if the underlying stock continues to fall dramat­
ically, although the "roll down," "do nothing," and combinations work out best, 
because they continue to accrue profits if the stock continues to fall. If the underly­
ing stock rises instead, only the combination outdistances the simplest tactic of all, 
liquidation. 
If the underlying stock stabilizes, the "do-nothing" and "spread" tactics work out 
best. It would generally appear that the combination tactic or the "roll-down" tactic 
would be the most attractive, since neither one has any risk and both could generate 
large profits if the stock moved substantially. The advantage for the spread was sub­
stantial in call options, but in the case of puts, the premium received for the out-of­
the-money put is not as large, and therefore the spread strategy loses some of its 
attractiveness. Finally, any of these tactics could be applied partially; for example, one 
could sell out half of a profitable long position in order to take some profits, and con­
tinue to hold the remainder. 
===== PDF page index 294 =====
Cl,opter 16:PutOptionBuying 
LOSS-LIMITING ACTIONS 
267 
The foregoing discussion concentrated on how the put holder could retain or 
increase his profit. However, it is often the case in option buying that the holder of 
the option is faced with an unrealized loss. The put holder may also have several 
choices of action to take in this case. His first, and simplest, course of action would 
be to sell the put and take his loss. Although this is advisable in certain cases, espe­
cially when the underlying stock seems to have assumed a distinctly bullish stance, it 
is not always the wisest thing to do. The put holder who has a loss may also consider 
either "rolling up" to create a bearish spread or entering into a calendar spread. 
Either of these actions could help him recover part or all of his loss. 
THE "ROLLING-UP" STRATEGY 
The reader may recall that a similar action to "rolling up," termed "rolling down," was 
available for call options held at a loss and was described in Chapter 3. The put buyer 
who owns a put at a loss may be able to create a spread that allows him to break even 
at a more favorable price at expiration. Such action will inevitably limit his profit 
potential, but is generally useful in recovering something from a put that might oth­
erwise expire totally worthless. 
Example: An investor initially purchases an XYZ October 45 put for 3 points when 
the underlying stock is at 45. However, the stock rises to 48 at a later date and the 
put that was originally bought for 3 points is now selling for 1 ¼ points. It is not 
unusual, by the way, for a put to retain this much of its value even though the stock 
has moved up and some amount of time has passed, since out-of-the-money puts 
tend to hold time value premium rather well. With XYZ at 48, an October 50 put 
might be selling for 3 points. The put holder could create a position designed to per­
mit recovery of some of his losses by selling two of the puts that he is long - October 
45's - and simultaneously buying one October 50 put. The net cost for this transac­
tion would be only commissions, since he receives $300 from selling two puts at 1 ¼ 
each, which completely covers the $300 cost of buying the October 50 put. The 
transactions are summarized in Table 16-6. 
By selling 2 of the October 45 puts, the investor is now short an October 45 put. 
Since he also purchased an October 50 put, he has a spread ( technically, a bear 
spread). He has spent no additional money, except commissions, to set up this spread, 
since the sale of the October 45's covered the purchase of the October 50 put. This 
strategy is most attractive when the debit involved to create the spread is small. In 
this example, the debit is zero. 
===== PDF page index 295 =====
268 
TABLE 16-6. 
Summary of rolling-up transactions. 
Original trade: 
Later: 
Net position: 
Buy 1 October 45 put for 3 
with XYZ at 45 
With XYZ at 48, sell 2 
October 45's for 11/2 each 
and buy l October 50 put for 3 
Long 1 October 50 put 
Short 1 October 45 put 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
$300 debit 
$300 credit 
$300 debit 
$300 debit 
The effect of creating this spread is that the investor has not increased his risk 
at all, but has raised the break-even point for his position. That is, if XYZ merely falls 
a small distance, he will be able to get out even. Without the effect of creating the 
spread, the put holder would need XYZ to fall back to 42 at expiration in order for 
him to break even, since he originally paid 3 points for the October 45 put. His orig­
inal risk was $300. IfXYZ continues to rise in price and the puts in the spread expire 
worthless, the net loss will still be only $300 plus additional commissions. Admittedly, 
the commissions for the spread will increase the loss slightly, but they are small in 
comparison to the debit of the position ($300). On the other hand, if the stock should 
fall back only slightly, to 47 by expiration, the spread will break even. At expiration, 
with XYZ at 47, the in-the-money October 50 put will be worth 3 points and the out­
of-the-money October 45 put will expire worthless. Thus, the investor will recover his 
$300 cost, except for commissions, with XYZ at 47 at expiration. His break-even point 
is raised from 42 to 47, a substantial improvement of his chances for recovery. 
The implementation of this spread strategy reduces the profit potential of the 
position, however. The maximum potential of the spread is 2 points. If XYZ is any­
where below 45 at expiration, the spread will be worth 5 points, since the October 50 
put will sell for 5 points more than the October 45 put. The investor has limited his 
potential profit to 2 points - the 5-point maximum width of the spread, less the 3 
points that he paid to get into the position. He can no longer gain substantially on a 
large drop in price by the underlying stock. This is normally of little concern to the 
put holder faced with an unrealized loss and the potential for a total loss. He gener­
ally would be appreciative of getting out even or of making a small profit. The cre­
ation of the spread accomplishes this objective for him. 
It should also be pointed out that he does not incur the maximum loss of his 
entire debit plus commissions, unless XYZ closes above 50 at expiration. If XYZ is 
===== PDF page index 296 =====
O,apter 16: Put Option Buying 269 
anywhere below 50, the October 50 will have some value and the investor will be able 
to recover something from the position. This is distinctly different from the original 
put holding of the October 45, whereby the maximum loss would be incurred unless 
the stock were below 45 at expiration. Thus, the introduction of the spread also 
reduces the chances of having to realize the maximum loss. 
In summary, the put holder faced with an unrealized loss may be able to create 
a spread by selling twice the number of puts that he is currently long and simultane­
ously buying the put at the next higher strike. This action should be used only if the 
spread can be transacted at a small debit or, preferably, at even money (zero debit). 
The spread position offers a much better chance of breaking even and also reduces 
the possibility of having to realize the maximum loss in the position. However, the 
introduction of these loss-limiting measures reduces the maximum potential of the 
position if the underlying stock should subsequently decline in price by a significant 
amount. Using this spread strategy for puts would require a margin account, just as 
calls do. 
THE CALENDAR SPREAD STRATEGY 
Another strategy is sometimes available to the put holder who has an unrealized loss. 
If the put that he is holding has an intermediate-term or long-term expiration date, 
he might be able to create a calendar spread by selling the near-term put against the 
put that he currently holds. 
Example: An investor bought an XYZ October 45 put for 3 points when the stock was 
at 45. The stock rises to 48, moving in the wrong direction for the put buyer, and his 
put falls in value to 1 ½. He might, at that time, consider selling the near-term July 
45 put for 1 point. The ideal situation would be for the July 45 put to expire worth­
less, reducing the cost of his long put by 1 point. Then, if the underlying stock 
declined below 45, he could profit after July expiration. 
The major drawback to this strategy is that little or no profit will be made - in 
fact, a loss is quite possible - if the underlying stock falls back to 45 or below before 
the near-term July option expires. Puts display different qualities in their time value 
premiums than calls do, as has been noted before. With the stock at 45, the differ­
ential between the July 45 put and the October 45 put might not widen much at all. 
This would mean that the spread has not gained anything, and the spreader has a loss 
equal to his commissions plus the initial unrealized loss. In the example above, ifXYZ 
dropped quickly back to 45, the July 45 might be worth 1 ½ and the October worth 
2½. At this point, the spreader would have a loss on both sides of his spread: He sold 
the July 45 put for 1 and it is now 1 ½; he bought the October 45 for 3 and it is now 
===== PDF page index 297 =====
270 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
2½; plus he has spent two commissions to date and would have to spend two more 
to liquidate the position. 
At this point, the strategist may decide to do nothing and take his chances that 
the stock will subsequently rally so that the July 45 put will expire worthless. 
However, if the stock continues to decline below 45, the spread will most certainly 
become more of a loss as both puts come closer to parity. 
This type of spread strategy is not as attractive as the "rolling-up" strategy. In 
the "rolling-up" strategy, one is not subjected to a loss if the stock declines after the 
spread is established, although he does limit his profits. The fact that the calendar 
spread strategy can lead to a loss even if the stock declines makes it a less desirable 
alternative. 
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS 
Before considering other put-oriented strategies, the reader should understand the 
definition of an equivalent position. Two strategies, or positions, are equivalent when 
they have the same profit potential. They may have different collateral or investment 
requirements, but they have similar profit potentials. Many of the call-oriented 
strategies that were discussed in Part II of the book have an equivalent put strategy. 
One such case has already been described: The "protected short sale," or shorting the 
common stock and buying a call, is equivalent to the purchase of a put. That is, both 
have a limited risk above the striking price of the option and relatively large profit 
potential to the downside. An easy way to tell if two strategies are equivalent is to see 
if their profit graphs have the same shape. The put purchase and the "protected short 
sale" have profit graphs with exactly the same shape (Figures 16-1 and 4-1, respec­
tively). As more put strategies are discussed, it will always be mentioned if the put 
strategy is equivalent to a previously described call strategy. This may help to clarify 
the put strategies, which understandably may seem complex to the reader who is not 
familiar with put options. 
===== PDF page index 298 =====
Put Buying in Conjunction 
with Com.m.on Stock 
Ownership 
Another useful feature of put options, in addition to their speculative leverage in a 
downward move by the underlying stock, is that the put purchase can be used to limit 
downside loss in a stock that is owned. When one simultaneously owns both the com­
mon stock and a put on that same stock, he has a position with limited downside risk 
during the life of the put. This position is also called a synthetic long call, because the 
profit graph is the same shape as a long call's. 
Example: An investor owns XYZ stock, which is at 52, and purchases an XYZ October 
50 put for 2. The put gives him the right to sell XYZ at 50, so the most that the stock­
holder can lose on his stock is 2 points. Since he pays 2 points for the put protection, his 
maximum potential loss until October expiration is 4 points, no matter how far XYZ 
might decline up until that time. If, on the other hand, the price of the stock should 
move up by October, the investor would realize any gain in the stock, less the 2 points 
that he paid for the put protection. The put functions much like an insurance policy with 
a finite life. Table 17-1 and Figure 17-1 depict the results at October expiration for this 
position: buying the October 50 put for 2 points to protect a holding in XYZ common 
stock, which is selling at 52. The dashed line on the graph represents the profit poten­
tial of the common stock ownership by itself. Notice that if the stock were below 48 in 
October, the common stock owner would have been better off buying the put. However, 
with XYZ above 48 at expiration, the put purchase was a burden that cost a small por­
tion of potential profits. This strategy, however, is not necessarily geared to maximizing 
211 