
===== PDF page index 869 =====
CHAPTER 39 
Volatility Trading Techniques 
The previous three chapters laid the foundation for volatility trading. In this chapter, 
the actual application of the technique will be described. It should be understood 
that volatility trading is both an art and a science. It's a science to the extent that one 
must be rigorous about determining historical volatility or implied volatility, calculat­
ing probabilities, and so forth. However, given the vagaries of those measurements 
that were described in some detail in the previous chapters, volatility trading is also 
something of an art. Just as two fundamental analysts with the same information 
regarding earnings, sales projection, and so on might have two different opinions 
about a stock's fortunes, so also can two volatility traders disagree about the potential 
for movement in a stock. 
However, volatility traders do agree on the approach. It is based on comparing 
today's implied volatility with what one expects volatility to do in the future. As noted 
previously, one's expectations for volatility might be based on volatility charts, pat­
terns of historical volatility and implied volatility, or something as complicated as a 
GAR CH forecasting model. None of them guarantees success. However, we do know 
that volatility tends to trade in a range in the long run. Therefore, the approach that 
traders agree upon is this: If implied volatility is "low," buy it. If it's "high," sell it with 
caution. So simple: Buy low, sell high (not necessarily in that order). The theory 
behind volatility trading is that it's easier to buy low and sell high (or at least to deter­
mine what's "low" and "high") when one is speaking about volatility, than it is to do 
the same thing when one is talking about stock prices. 
Most of the time, implied volatility will not be significantly high or low on any 
particular stock, futures contract, or index. Therefore, the volatility trader will have 
little interest in most stocks on any given day. This is especially true of the big-cap 
stocks, the ones whose options are most heavily traded. There are so many traders 
812 
===== PDF page index 870 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 813 
watching the situation for those stocks that they will rarely let volatility get to the 
extremes that one would consider "too high" or "too low." Yet, with the large num­
ber of optionable stocks, futures, and indices that exist, there are always some that 
are out of line, and that's where the independent volatility trader will concentrate 
his efforts. 
Once a volatility extreme has been uncovered, there are different methods of 
trading it. Some traders - market-makers and short-term traders - are just looking 
for very fleeting trades, and expect volatility to fall back into line quickly after an 
aberrant move. Others prefer more of a position traders' approach: attempting to 
determine volatility extremes that are so far out of line with accepted norms that it 
will probably take some time to move back into line. Obviously, the trader's own sit­
uation will dictate, to a certain extent, which strategy he pursues. Things such as 
commission rates, capital requirements, and risk tolerance will determine whether 
one is more of a short-term trader or a position trader. The techniques to be 
described in this chapter apply to both methods, although the emphasis will be on 
position trading. 
TWO WAYS VOLATILITY PREDICTIONS CAN BE WRONG 
When traders determine the implied volatility of the options on any particular under­
lying instrument, they may generally be correct in their predictions; that is, implied 
volatility will actually be a fairly good estimate of forthcoming volatility. However, 
when they're wrong, they can actually be wrong in two ways: either in the outright 
prediction of volatility or in the path of their volatility predictions. Let's discuss both. 
When they're wrong about the absolute level of volatility, that merely means that 
implied volatility is either "too low" or "too high." In retrospect, one could only make 
that assessment, of course, after having seen what actual volatility turned out to be 
over the life of the option. The second way they could be wrong is by making the 
implied volatility on some of the options on a particular underlying instrument much 
cheaper or more expensive than other options on that same underlying instrument. 
This is called a volatility skew and it is usually an incorrect prediction about the way 
the underlying will perform during the life of the options. 
The rest of this chapter will be divided into two main parts, then. The first part 
will deal with volatility from the viewpoint of the absolute level of implied volatility 
being "wrong" (which we'll call "trading the volatility prediction"), and the second 
part will deal with trading the volatility skew. 
===== PDF page index 871 =====
814 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
TRADING THE VOLATILITY PREDICTION 
The volatility trader must have some way of determining when implied volatility is 
sufficiently out of line that it warrants a trade. Then he must decide what trade to 
establish. Furthermore, as with any strategy- especially option strategies - follow-up 
action is important too. We will not be introducing any new strategies, per se, in this 
chapter. Those strategies have already been laid out in the previous chapters of this 
book. However, we will briefly review important points about those strategies and 
their follow-up actions where it is appropriate. 
First, one must try to find situations in which implied volatility is out of line. 
That is not the end of the analysis, though. After that, one needs to do some proba­
bility work and needs to see how the underlying has behaved in the past. Other fine­
tuning measures are often useful, too. These will all be described in this chapter. 
DETERMINING WHEN VOLATILITY IS OUT OF LINE 
There is much disagreement among volatility traders regarding the best method to use 
for determining if implied volatility is "out ofline." Most favor comparing implied with 
historical volatility. However, it was shown two chapters ago that implied volatility is 
not necessarily a good predictor of historical volatility. Yet this approach cannot be dis­
carded; however it must be used judiciously. Another approach is to compare today's 
implied volatility with where it has been in the past. This concept relies heavily on the 
concept of the percentile of implied volatility. Finally, there is the approach of trying 
to "read" the charts of implied and historical volatility. This is actually something akin 
to what GARCH tries to do, but on a short-term horizon. So the approaches are: 
1. Compare implied volatility to its own past levels (percentile approach). 
2. Compare implied volatility to historical volatility. 
3. Interpret the chart of volatility. 
In addition, we will examine two lesser-used methods: comparing current levels of 
historical volatility to past measures of historical volatility, and finally, using only a 
probability calculator and trading the situation that has the best probabilities of 
success. 
THE PERCENTILE APPROACH 
In this author's opinion, there is much merit in the percentile approach. When one says 
that volatility tends to trade in a range, which is the basic premise behind volatility trad-
===== PDF page index 872 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 815 
ing, he is generally talking about implied volatility. Thus, it makes sense to know where 
implied volatility is within the range of the past readings of implied volatility. If volatil­
ity is low with respect to where it usually trades, then we can say the options are cheap. 
Conversely, if it's high with respect to those past values, then we can say the options are 
expensive. These conclusions do not draw on historical volatility. 
The percentile of implied volatility is generally used to describe just where the 
current implied volatility reading lies with respect to its past values. The "implied 
volatility" reading that is being used in this case is the composite reading - the one 
that takes into account all the options on an underlying instrument, weighting them 
by their distance in- or out-of-the-money (at-the-money gets more weight) and also 
weighting them by their trading volume. This technique has been referred to many 
times and was first described in Chapter 28 on mathematical applications. That com­
posite implied volatility reading can be stored in a database for each underlying 
instrument every day. Such databases are available for purchase from firms that spe­
cialize in option data. Also, snapshots of such data are available to members of 
www.optionstrategist.com. 
In general, most underlying instruments would have a composite implied 
volatility reading somewhere near the 50th percentile on any given day. However, it 
is not uncommon to see some underlyings with percentile readings near zero or 100% 
on a given day. These are the ones that would interest a volatility trader. Those with 
readings in the 10th percentile or less, say, would be considered "cheap"; those in the 
90th percentile or higher would be considered expensive. 
In reality, the percentile of implied volatility is going to be affected by what the 
broad market is doing. For example, during a severe market slide, implied volatilities 
will increase across the board. Then, one may find a large number of stocks whose 
options are in the 90th percentile or higher. Conversely, there have been other times 
when overall implied volatility has declined substantially: 1993, for example, and the 
summer of 2001, for another. At those times, we often find a great number of stocks 
whose options reside in the 10th percentile of implied volatility or lower. The point 
is that the distribution of percentile readings is a dynamic thing, not something stat­
ic like a lognormal distribution. Yes, perhaps over a long period of time and taking 
into account a great number of cases, we might find that the percentiles of implied 
volatility are normally distributed, but not on any given day. 
The trader has some discretion over this percentile calculation. Foremost, he 
must decide how many days of past history he wants to use in determining the per­
centiles. There are about 255 trading days in a year. So, if he wanted a two-year his­
tory, he would record the percentile of today's composite implied volatility with 
respect to the 510 daily readings over the past two years. This author typically uses 
===== PDF page index 873 =====
816 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
600 days of implied volatility history for the purpose of determining percentiles, but 
a case could be made for other lengths of time. The purpose is to use enough implied 
volatility history to give one a good perspective. Then, a reading of the 10th per­
centile or the 90th percentile will truly be significant and would therefore be a good 
starting point in determining whether the options are cheap or expensive. 
In addition to the actual percentile, the trader should also be aware of the width 
of the implied volatility distribution. This was discussed in an earlier chapter, but 
essentially the concept is this: If the first percentile is an implied volatility of 40% and 
the 100th percentile is an implied volatility of 45%, then that entire range is so nar­
row as to be meaningless in terms of whether one could classify the options as cheap 
or expensive. 
The advantage of buying options in a low percentile of implied volatility is to 
give oneself two ways to make money: one, via movement in the underlying (if a 
straddle were owned, for example), and two, by an increase in implied volatility. That 
is, if the options were to return to the 50th percentile of implied volatility, the volatil­
ity trader who has bought "cheap" options should expect to make money from that 
movement as well. That can only happen if the 50th percentile and the 10th per­
centile are sufficiently far apart to allow for an increase in the price of the option to 
be meaningful. Perhaps a good rule of thumb is this: If the option rises from the cur­
rent (low) percentile reading to the 50th percentile in a month, will the increase in 
implied volatility be equal to or greater than the time decay over that period? 
Alternatively stated, with all other things being equal, will the option be trading at 
the same or a greater price in a month, if implied volatility rises to the 50th percentile 
at the end of that time? If so, then the width of the range of implied volatilities is 
great enough to produce the desired results. 
The attractiveness to this method for determining if implied volatility is out of 
line is that the trader is "forced" to buy options that are cheap ( or to sell options that 
are expensive), on a relative basis. Even though historical volatility has not been taken 
into consideration, it will be later on when the probability calculators are brought to 
bear. There is no guarantee, of course, that implied volatility will move toward the 
50th percentile while the position is in place, but if it does, that will certainly be an 
aid to the position. 
In effect this method is measuring what the option trading public is "thinking" 
about volatility and comparing it with what they've thought in the past. Since the pub­
lic is wrong (about prices as well as volatility) at major turning points, it is valid to want 
to be long volatility when "everyone else" has pushed it down to depressed levels. The 
converse may not necessarily be true: that we would want to be short volatility when 
everyone else has pushed it up to extremely high levels. The caveat in that case is that 
===== PDF page index 874 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 817 
someone may have inside information that justifies expensive options. This is another 
reason why selling volatility can be difficult: You may be dealing with far less infor­
mation than those who are actually making the implied volatility high. 
COMPARING IMPLIED AND HISTORICAL VOLATILITY 
The most common way that traders determine which options are cheap or expensive 
is by comparing the current composite implied volatility with various historical 
volatility measures. However, just because this is the conventional wisdom does not 
necessarily mean that this method is the preferred one for determining which options 
are best for volatility trades. In this author's opinion, it is inferior to the percentile 
method (comparing implied to past measures of implied), but it does have its merits. 
The theory behind using this method is that it is a virtual certainty that implied and 
historical volatility will eventually converge with each other. So, if one establishes 
volatility trading positions when they are far apart, there is supposedly an advantage 
there. 
However, this argument has plenty of holes in it. First of all, there is no guar­
antee that the two will converge in a timely manner, for example, before the options 
in the trader's position can become profitable. Historical and implied volatility often 
remain fairly far apart for weeks at a time. 
Second, even if the convergence does occur, it doesn't necessarily mean one will 
make money. As an example, consider the case in which implied volatility is 40% and 
historical volatility is 60%. That's quite a difference, so you'd want to buy volatility. 
Furthermore, suppose the two do converge. Does that mean you'll make money? No, 
it does not. What if they converge and meet at 40%? Or, worse yet, at 30%? You'd 
most certainly lose in those cases as the stock slowed down while your options lost 
time value. 
Another problem with this method is that implied volatility is not necessarily 
low when it is bought, nor high when it is sold. Consider the example just cited. We 
merely knew that implied volatility was 40% and that historical volatility was 60%. We 
had no perspective on whether 40% was high, medium, or low. Thus, it is also nec­
essary to see what the percentile of implied volatility is. If it turns out that 40% is a 
relatively high reading for implied volatility, as determined by looking at where 
implied volatility has been over the past couple of years, then we would probably not 
want to buy volatility in this situation, even though implied and historical volatility 
have a large discrepancy between them. 
Many market-makers and floor traders use this approach. However, they are 
often looking for an option that is briefly mispriced, figuring that volatilities will 
===== PDF page index 875 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-
===== PDF page index 876 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-
===== PDF page index 877 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-
===== PDF page index 878 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 819 
ly not much different from the GARCH approach, which is considered to be highly 
advanced. When one views the volatility chart, he is not looking for chart patterns like 
technical analysts might do with stock charts: support, resistance, head-and-shoul­
ders, flags, pennants, and so on. Rather, he is merely looking for the trend of volatil­
ity to change. 
This is a valid approach in the use of many indicators, particularly sentiment 
indicators, that can go to extreme levels. By waiting for the trend to change, the user 
is not subjecting himself to buying into the midst of a downtrend in volatility, nor sell­
ing into the midst of a steep uptrend in volatility. 
Example: Suppose a volatility trader has determined that the current level of implied 
volatility for XYZ stock is in the 1st percentile of all past readings. Thus, the options 
are as cheap as they've ever been. Perhaps, though, the overall market is experienc­
ing a very dull period, or XYZ itself has been in a prolonged, tight trading range -
either of which might cause implied volatility to decline steadily and substantially. 
Having found these cheap options, he wants to buy volatility. However, he has no 
guarantee that implied volatility won't continue to decline, even though it is already 
as cheap as it's ever been. 
If he follows the technique of waiting for a reversal in the trend of implied 
volatility, then he would keep an eye on XYZ's implied volatility daily until it had at 
least a modest increase, something to indicate that option buyers have become more 
interested in XYZ's options. The chart in Figure 39-1 shows how this situation might 
look. 
There are a number of items marked on the chart, so it will be described in 
detail. There are two graphs in Figure 39-1: The top line is the implied volatility 
graph, while on the bottom is the stock price chart. The implied volatility chart shows 
that, near the first ofJune, it made new all-time lows near 28% (i.e., it was in the 0th 
percentile of implied volatility). Hence, one might have bought volatility at that 
point. However, it is obvious that implied volatility was in a steep downtrend at that 
time, so the volatility trader who reads the charts might have decided to wait for a 
pop in volatility before buying. This turned out to be a judicious decision, because 
the stock went nowhere for nearly another month and a half, all the while volatility 
was dropping. At the right of the chart, implied volatility has dropped to nearly 20%. 
The solid lines on the two graphs indicate the data that is known about the 
implied volatility and price history of XYZ. The dotted lines indicate a scenario that 
might unfold. If implied volatility were to jump ( and the stock price might jump, too), 
then one might think that the trend of implied volatility was no longer down, and he 
would then buy volatility. 
===== PDF page index 879 =====
820 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatHity 
The reason that this approach has merit is that one never knows how low volatil­
ity can go, and more important, how high it can get. It was mentioned that the same 
sort of approach works well for other sentiment indicators, the put-call ratio, in par­
ticular. During the bull market of the 1990s, the equity-only put-call ratio generally 
ranged between about 30 and 55. Thus, some traders became accustomed to buying 
the market when the put-call ratio reached numbers exceeding 50 (high put-call 
ratio numbers are bullish predictors for the market in general). However, when the 
bull market ended, or at least faltered, the put-call ratios zoomed to heights near 70 
or 75. Thus, those using a static approach (that is, "Buy at 50 or higher") were buried 
as they bought too early and had to suffer while the put-call ratios went to new all­
time highs. A trend reversal approach would have saved them. It is a more dynamic 
procedure, and thus one would have let the put-call ratio continue to rise until it 
peaked. Then the market could have been bought. 
This is exactly what reading the volatility chart is about. Rather than relying on 
past data to indicate where the absolute maxima and minima of movements might 
occur, one rather notes that the volatility data is at extreme levels ( 1st percentile or 
100th percentile) and then watches it until it reverses direction. This is especially 
useful for options sellers, because it avoids stepping into the vortex of massive option 
FIGURE 39-1. 
Chart of the trend of implied volatility. 
XYZ 
,J' 
········································ · ························ ....................... ··················· 50. 0 
... · ····················· 40. 0 
Implied Volatility I/vi A r 
···-····························· .. •·•······•·········-·············································-··vw•···················)·•······ 30. 0 
All-Time Volatility Low -
, .... , ..... , .. ··················,·······~················ 
t :t·•····•····· ...•. ':·LJJSL5~?. 
--;---··········•·: 
o, b ::r F f1 h j ::r 
34.000 
32.000 
30. 000 
28. 000 
26.000 
24.000 
22.000 
20. 000 
===== PDF page index 880 =====
Chapter 39: VolatiDty Trading Techniques 821 
buying, where the buyers perhaps have inside information about some forthcominf 
corporate event such as a takeover. True, the options might be very expensive ( 10ot 
percentile), but there is a reason they are, and those with the inside information know 
the reason, whereas the typical volatility trader might not. However, if the volatility 
trader merely waits for a downturn in implied volatility readings before selling these 
options, he will most likely avoid the majority of trouble because the options will 
probably not lose implied volatility until news comes out or until the buyers give up 
(perhaps figuring that the takeover rumor has died). 
Volatility buyers don't face the same problems with early entry that volatility 
sellers do, but still it makes sense to wait for the trend of volatility to increase (as in 
Figure 39-1) before trying to guess the bottom in volatility. Just as it is usually fool­
hardy to buy a stock that is in a severe downtrend, so it may be, too, with buying 
volatility. 
A less useful approach would be to apply the same techniques to historical 
volatility charts, for such charts say nothing about option prices. See the next section 
for expansion on these thoughts. 
COMPARING HISTORICAL VERSUS HISTORICAL 
The above paragraphs summarize the three major ways that traders attempt to find 
options that are out of line. Sometimes, another method is mentioned: comparing 
current levels of historical volatility with past levels of the same measure, historical 
volatility. This method will be described, but it is generally an inferior method 
because such a comparison doesn't tell us anything about the option prices. It would 
do little good, for example, to find that current historical volatility is in a very low per­
centile of historical volatilities, only to learn later that the options are expensive and 
that perhaps implied volatility is even higher than historical volatility. One would nor­
mally not want to buy options in that case, so the initial analysis of comparing histor­
ical to historical is a wasted effort. 
Comparing current levels of historical volatility with past measures of historical 
volatility is sort of a backward-looking approach, since historical volatility involves 
strictly the use of past stock prices. There is no consideration of implied volatility in 
this approach. Moreover, this method makes the tacit assumption that a stock's 
volatility characteristics do not change, that it will revert to some sort of "normal" past 
price behavior in terms of volatility. In reality, this is not true at all. Nearly every stock 
can be shown to have considerable changes in its historical volatility patterns over 
time. 