
===== PDF page index 308 =====
278 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
large losses. The covered writer who buys puts may often find it easier to operate in 
a more rational manner when he has the protective put in place. 
This strategy is equivalent to one that has been described before, the bull 
spread. Notice that the profit graph in Figure 17-2 has the same shape as the bull 
spread profit graph (Figure 7-1). This means that the two strategies are equivalent. 
In fact, in Chapter 7 it was pointed out that the bull spread could sometimes be con­
sidered a "substitute" for covered writing. Actually, the bull spread is more akin to 
this strategy- the covered write protected by a put purchase. There are, of course, 
differences between the strategies. They are equivalent in profit and loss potential, 
but the covered writer could never lose all his investment in a short period of time, 
although the spreader could. In order to actually use bull spreads as substitutes for 
covered writes, one would invest only a small portion of his available funds in the 
spread and would place the remainder of his funds in fixed-income securities. That 
strategy was discussed in more depth in Chapter 7. 
NO-COST COLLARS 
The "collar" strategy is often arrived at in another manner: a stockholder begins 
to worry about the downside potential of the stock market and decides to buy puts 
on his stock as protection. However, he is dismayed by the cost of the puts and so he 
also considers the sale of calls. If he buys an out-of-the-money put, it is quite possi­
ble that he might be able to sell an out-of-the-money call whose proceeds complete­
ly cover the cost of the put. Thus, he has established a protective collar at no cost -
at least no debit. His "cost" is the fact that he has forsaken the upside profit poten­
tial on his stock, above the striking price of the written call. 
In fact, certain large institutional traders are able to transact collars through 
large over-the-counter option brokers, such as Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley. 
They might even give the broker instructions such as this: "I own XYZ and I want to 
buy a put 10 percent out of the money that e.:\.J)ires in a year. What would the strik­
ing price of a one-year call have to be in order to create a no-cost collar?" The bro­
ker might then tell him that such a call would have to be struck 30 percent out of the 
money. The actual strike price of the call would depend on the volatility estimate for 
the underlying stock, as well as interest rates and dividends. These types of transac­
tions occur with a fair amount of frequency. 
Some very interesting situations can be created with long-term options. One of 
the most interesting occurred in 1999, when a company that owned 5 million shares 
of Cisco (CSCO) decided it would like to hedge them by creating a no-cost collar 
over the next three years. At the time, CSCO was trading at about 130, and its volatil­
ity was about 50%. It turns out that a three-year put struck at 130 sells for about the 
===== PDF page index 309 =====
278 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
large losses. The covered writer who buys puts may often find it easier to operate in 
a more rational manner when he has the protective put in place. 
This strategy is equivalent to one that has been described before, the bull 
spread. Notice that the profit graph in Figure 17-2 has the same shape as the bull 
spread profit graph (Figure 7-1). This means that the two strategies are equivalent. 
In fact, in Chapter 7 it was pointed out that the bull spread could sometimes be con­
sidered a "substitute" for covered writing. Actually, the bull spread is more akin to 
this strategy - the covered write protected by a put purchase. There are, of course, 
differences between the strategies. They are equivalent in profit and loss potential, 
but the covered writer could never lose all his investment in a short period of time, 
although the spreader could. In order to actually use bull spreads as substitutes for 
covered ,vrites, one would invest only a small portion of his available funds in the 
spread and would place the remainder of his funds in fixed-income securities. That 
strategy was discussed in more depth in Chapter 7. 
NO-COST COLLARS 
The "collar" strategy is often arrived at in another manner: a stockholder begins 
to worry about the downside potential of the stock market and decides to buy puts 
on his stock as protection. However, he is dismayed by the cost of the puts and so he 
also considers the sale of calls. If he buys an out-of-the-money put, it is quite possi­
ble that he might be able to sell an out-of-the-money call whose proceeds complete­
ly cover the cost of the put. Thus, he has established a protective collar at no cost -
at least no debit. His "cost" is the fact that he has forsaken the upside profit poten­
tial on his stock, above the striking price of the written call. 
In fact, certain large institutional traders are able to transact collars through 
large over-the-counter option brokers, such as Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley. 
They might even give the broker instructions such as this: "I own XYZ and I want to 
buy a put 10 percent out of the money that expires in a year. What would the strik­
ing p1ice of a one-year call have to be in order to create a no-cost collar?" The bro­
ker might then tell him that such a call would have to be struck 30 percent out of the 
money. The actual strike price of the call would depend on the volatility estimate for 
the underlying stock, as well as interest rates and dividends. These types of transac­
tions occur with a fair amount of frequency. 
Some very interesting situations can be created with long-term options. One of 
the most interesting occurred in 1999, when a company that owned 5 million shares 
of Cisco ( CSCO) decided it would like to hedge them by creating a no-cost collar 
over the next three years. At the time, CSCO was trading at about 130, and its volatil­
ity was about 50%. It turns out that a three-year put struck at 130 sells for about the 
===== PDF page index 310 =====
Cltapter 17: Put Buying in Conjunction with Common Stock Ownership 
TABLE 17-3. 
Highest Call Strike That Pays for an At-the-Money Put 
(Assuming 2.5 years to expiration) 
Volatility Coll Strike 
30% 
40% 
50% 
70% 
100% 
of Underlying 
30% out of money 
35% out of money 
40% out of money 
50% out of money 
70% out of money 
279 
same price as a three-year call struck at 200! That may seem illogical, but the figures 
can be checked out with the aid of an option-pricing model. Thus, this company was 
able to hedge all of its CSCO stock, with no downside risk ( the striking price of the 
puts was the same as the current stock price) and still had profit potential of over 50% 
to the upside over the next three years. 
Thus, one should consider using LEAPS options when he establishes a collar -
even ifhe is not an institutional trader - because the striking price of the calls can be 
quite high in comparison to that of the put' s strike or in comparison to the price of 
the underlying stock. Table 17-3 shows how far out-of-the-money a written call could 
be that still covers the cost of buying an at-the-money put. The time to expiration in 
this table is 2.5 years - the longest term listed option that currently exists as a LEAPS 
option. 
USING LOWER STRIKES AS A PARTIAL COVERED WRITE 
It should also be pointed out that one does not necessarily have to forsake all of 
the profit potential from his stock. He might buy the puts, as usual, and then sell calls 
with a somewhat lower strike than needed for a low-cost collar, but the quantity of 
calls sold would be less than that of stock owned. In that way, there would be unlim­
ited profit potential on some of the shares of the underlying stock. 
Example: Suppose that the following prices exist: 
XYZ:61 
Apr 55 put: 1 
Apr 65 call: 2 
Furthermore, suppose that one owns 1000 shares of XYZ. Thus, the purchase 
of 10 Apr 55 puts at 1 point apiece would protect the downside. In order to cover the 
cost of those puts ($1000), one need only sell five of the Apr 65 calls at 2 points 
===== PDF page index 311 =====
280 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
apiece. Thus, the protection would have cost nothing and there would still be unlim­
ited profit potential on 500 of the shares of XYZ, since only five calls were sold against 
the 1000 shares that are owned. 
In this manner, one could get quite creative in constructing collars - deciding 
what call strike to use in order to strike a balance between paying for the puts and 
allowing upside profit potential. The lower the strike he uses for the written calls, the 
fewer calls he will have to write; the higher the strike of the written calls, the more 
calls will be necessary to cover the cost of the purchased puts. The tradeoff is that a 
lower call strike allows for more eventual upside profit potential, but it limits what 
has been written against to a lower price. 
Using the above example once again, these facts can be demonstrated: 
Example (continued): As before, the same prices exist, but now one more call will 
be brought into the picture: 
XYZ: 61 
Apr55 put: l 
Apr 65 call: 2 
Apr 70 call: l 
As before one could sell five of the Apr 65 calls to cover the cost of ten puts, or 
as an alternative he could sell ten of the Apr 70 calls. If he sells the five, he has unlim­
ited profit potential on 500 shares, but the other 500 shares will be called away at 65. 
In the alternative strategy, he has limited upside profit potential, but nothing will be 
called away until the stock reaches 70. Which is "better?" It's not easy to say. In the 
former strategy, if the stock climbs all the way to 75, it results in the same profit as if 
the stock is called away at 70 in the latter strategy. This is true because 500 shares 
would be worth 75, but the other 500 would have been called away at 65 - making 
for an average of 70. Hence, the former strategy only outperforms the latter if the 
stock actually climbs above 75 - a rather unlikely event, one would have to surmise. 
Still, many investors prefer the former strategy because it gives them protection with­
out asking them to surrender all of their upside profit potential. 
In summary, one can often be quite creative with the "collar" strategy. One thing 
to keep in mind: if one sells options against stock that he has no intention of selling, he 
is actually writing naked calls in his ovm mind. That is, if one owns stock that "can't" 
be sold - perhaps the capital gains would be devastating or the stock has been "in the 
family" for a long time - then he should not sell covered calls against it, because he will 
be forced into treating the calls as naked (if he refuses to sell the stock). This can cause 
quite a bit of consternation if the underlying stock rises significantly in price, that could 
have easily been avoided by not writing calls against the stock in the first place. 
===== PDF page index 312 =====
CHAPCIJER 18 
Buying Puts in Conjunction 
with Call Purchases 
There are several ways in which the purchases of both puts and calls can be used to 
the speculator's advantage. One simple method is actually a follow-up strategy for the 
call buyer. If the stock has advanced and the call buyer has a profit, he might con­
sider buying a put as a means of locking in his call profits while still allowing for more 
potential upside appreciation. In Chapter 3, four basic alternatives were listed for the 
call buyer who had a profit: He could liquidate the call and take his profit; he could 
do nothing; he could "roll up" by selling the call for a profit and using part of the pro­
ceeds to purchase more out-of-the-money calls; or he could create a bull spread by 
selling the out-of-the-money call against the profitable call that he holds. If the 
underlying stock has listed puts, he has another alternative: He could buy a put. This 
put purchase would serve to lock in some of the profits on the call and would still 
allow room for further appreciation if the stock should continue to rise in price. 
Example: An investor initially purchased an XYZ October 50 call for 3 points when 
the stock was at 48. Sometime later, after the stock had risen to 58, the call would be 
worth about 9 points. If there was an October 60 put, it might be selling for 4 points, 
and the call holder could buy this put to lock in some of his profits. His position, after 
purchasing the put, would be: 
Long l October 50 call at 3 points N t t 7 • t - e cos: pom s Long l October 60 put at 4 points 
He would own a "strangle" - any position consisting of both a put and a call with dif­
fering terms - that is always worth at least 10 points. The combination will be worth 
exactly 10 points at expiration if XYZ is anywhere between 50 and 60. For example, 
281 
===== PDF page index 313 =====
282 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
if xyz is at 52 at expiration, the call will be worth 2 points and the put will be wort Ii 
8 points. Alternatively, if the stock is at 58 at expiration, the put will be worth 2 points 
and the call worth 8 points. Should xyz be above 60 at expiration, the combination's 
value will be equal to the call's value, since the put will expire worthless with XYZ 
above 60. The call would have to be worth more than 10 points in that case, since it 
has a striking price of 50. Similarly, if xyz were below 50 at expiration, the combi­
nation would be worth more than 10 points, since the put would be more than 10 
points in-the-money and the call would be worthless. 
The speculator has thus created a position in which he cannot lose money, 
because he paid only 7 points for the combination (3 points for the call and 4 points 
for the put). No matter what happens, the combination will be worth at least 10 
points at e:x-piration, and a 3-point profit is thus locked in. If xyz should continue to 
climb in price, the speculator could make more than 3 points of profit whenever xyz 
is above 60 at expiration. Moreover, if xyz should suddenly collapse in price, the 
speculator could make more than 3 points of profit if the stock was below 50 by expi­
ration. The reader must realize that such a position can never be created as an initial 
position. This desirable situation arose only because the call had built up a substan­
tial profit before the put was purchased. The similar strategy for the put buyer who 
might buy a call to protect his unrealized put profits was described in Chapter 16. 
STRADDLE BUYING 
A straddle purchase consists of buying both a put and a call with the same terms -
sarne underlying stock, striking price, and expiration date. The straddle purchase 
allows the buyer to make large potential profits if the stock moves far enough in 
either direction. The buyer has a predetermined maximum loss, equal to the amount 
of his initial investment. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
xyz common, 50; 
XYZ July 50 call, 3; and 
XYZ July 50 put, 2. 
If one purchased both the July 50 call and the July 50 put, he would be buying a 
straddle. This would cost 5 points plus commissions. The investment required to 
purchase a straddle is the net debit. If the underlying stock is exactly at 50 at expi­
ration, the buyer would lose all his investment, since both the put and the call would 
expire worthless. If the stock were above .55 at expiration, the call portion of the 
===== PDF page index 314 =====
18: Buying Puts in Conjundion with Call Purchases 283 
dle would be worth more than 5 points and the straddle buyer would make 
y, even though his put expired worthless. To the downside, a similar situation 
Mists. If XYZ were below 45 at expiration, the put would be worth more than 5 
points and he would have a profit despite the fact that the call expired worthless. 
Table 18-1 and Figure 18-1 depict the results of this example straddle purchase at 
expiration. The straddle buyer can immediately determine his break-even points at 
expiration - 45 and 55 in this example. He will lose money if the underlying stock is 
between those break-even points at expiration. He has potentially large profits if 
XYZ should move a great distance away from 50 by expiration. 
One would normally purchase a straddle on a relatively volatile stock that has 
the potential to move far enough to make the straddle profitable in the allotted time. 
This strategy is particularly attractive when option premiums are low, since low pre­
miums will mean a cheaper straddle cost. Although losses may occur in a relatively 
large percentage of cases that are held all the way until their expiration date, there is 
actually only a minute probability of losing one's entire investment. Even if XYZ 
should be at 50 at expiration, there would still be the opportunity to sell the straddle 
for a small amount on the final day of trading. 
TABLE 18-1. 
Results of straddle purchase at expiration. 
XYZ Price at Total Straddle 
Expiration Coll Profit Put Profit Profit 
30 -$ 300 +$1,800 + $1,500 
40 300 + 800 + 500 
45 300 + 300 0 
50 300 200 500 
55 + 200 200 0 
60 + 700 200 + 500 
70 + 1,700 200 + 1,500 
EQUIVALENCES 
Straddle buying is equivalent to the reverse hedge, a strategy described in Chapter 4 
in which one sells the underlying stock short and purchases two calls on the under­
lying stock. Both strategies have similar profit characteristics: a limited loss that 
would occur at the striking price of the options involved, and potentially large prof­
its if the underlying stock should rise or fall far enough in price. The straddle pur-
===== PDF page index 315 =====
284 
FIGURE 18-1. 
Straddle purchase. 
C: 
.Q 
I!! ·a. 
X 
w 
ro $0 en en 0 
..J 
0 
-e a.. 
-$500 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Stock Price at Expiration 
chase is superior to the reverse hedge, however, and where listed puts exist on a stock, 
the reverse hedge strategy becomes obsolete. The reasons that the straddle purchase 
is superior are that dividends are not paid by the holder and that commission costs 
are much smaller in the straddle situation. 
REVERSE HEDGE WITH PUTS 
A third strategy is equivalent to both the straddle purchase and the reverse hedge. 
It consists of buying the underlying stock and buying two put options. If the stock 
rises substantially in price, large profits will accrue, for the stock profit will more 
than offset the fixed loss on the purchase of two put options. If the stock declines in 
price by a large amount, profits will also be generated. In a decline, the profits gen­
erated by 2 long puts will more than offset the loss on 100 shares of long stock. This 
form of the straddle purchase has limited risk as well. The worst case would occur 
if the stock were exactly at the striking price of the puts at their expiration date - the 
puts would both expire worthless. The risk is limited, percentagevvise and dollar­
wise, since the cost of two put options would normally be a relatively small per­
centage of the total cost of buying the stock. Furthermore, the investor may receive 
some dividends if the underlying stock is a dividend-paying stock. Buying stock and 
buying two puts is superior to the reverse hedge strategy, but is still inferior to the 
straddle purchase. 
===== PDF page index 316 =====
ter 18: Buying Puts in Conjunction with Call Purchases 
IILECTING A STRADDLE BUY 
285 
In theory, one could find the best straddle purchases by applying the analyses for best 
call purchases and best put purchases simultaneously. Then, if both the puts and calls 
on a particular stock showed attractive opportunity, the straddle could be bought. 
The straddle should be viewed as an entire position. A similar sort of analysis to that 
proposed for either put or call purchases could be used for straddles as well. First, 
one would assume the stock would move up or down in accordance with its volatili­
ty within a fixed time period, such as 60 or 90 days. Then, the prices of both the put 
and the call could be predicted for this stock movement. The straddles that off er the 
best reward opportunity under this analysis would be the most attractive ones to buy. 
To demonstrate this sort of analysis, the previous example can be utilized again. 
Example: XYZ is at 50 and the July 50 call is selling for 3 while the July 50 put is sell­
ing for 2 points. If the strategist is able to determine that XYZ has a 25% chance of 
being above 54 in 90 days and also has a 25% chance of being below 46 in 90 days, 
he can then predict the option prices. A rigorous method for determining what per­
centage chance a stock has of making a predetermined price movement is presented 
in Chapter 28 on mathematical applications. For now, a general procedure of analy­
sis is more important than its actual implementation. If XYZ were at 54 in 90 days, it 
might be reasonable to assume that the call would be worth 5½ and the put would 
be worth 1 point. The straddle would therefore be worth 6½ points. Similarly, if the 
stock were at 46 in 90 days, the put might be worth 4½ points, and the call worth 1 
point, making the entire straddle worth 5½ points. It is fairly common for the strad­
dle to be higher-priced when it is a fixed distance in-the-money on the call side (such 
as 4 points) than when it is in-the-money on the put side by that same distance. In 
this example, the strategist has now determined that there is a 25% chance that the 
straddle will be worth 6½ points in 90 days on an upside movement, and there is a 
25% chance that the straddle will be worth 5½ points on a downside movement. The 
average price of these two expectations is 6 points. Since the straddle is currently sell­
ing for 5 points, this would represent a 20% profit. If all potential straddles are 
ranked in the same manner - allowing for a 25% chance of upside and downside 
movement by each underlying stock - the straddle buyer will have a common basis 
for comparing various straddle opportunities. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
It has been mentioned frequently that there is a good chance that a stock will remain 
relatively unchanged over a short time period. This does not mean that the stock will 