
===== PDF page index 228 =====
Chapter 10: The Butterfly Spread 203 
Note that all of these answers agree with the results that were previously obtained by 
analyzing the example spread in detail. 
In this example, the maximum profit potential is $700, the maximum risk is 
$300, and the investment required is also $300, commissions excluded. In percent­
age terms, this means that the butterfly spread has a loss limited to about 100% of 
capital invested and could make profits of nearly 133% in this case. These represent 
an attractive risk/reward relationship. This is, however, just an example, and two fac­
tors that exist in the actual marketplace may greatly affect these numbers. First, com­
missions are large; it is possible that eight commissions might have to be paid to 
establish and liquidate the spread. Second, depending on the level of premiums to 
be found in the market at any point in time, it may not be possible to establish a 
spread for a debit as low as 3 points when the strikes are 10 points apart. 
SELECTING THE SPREAD 
Ideally, one would want to establish a butterfly spread at as small of a debit as pos­
sible in order to limit his risk to a small amount, although that risk is still equal to 
100% of the dollars invested in the spread. One would also like to have the stock be 
near the middle striking price to begin with, because he will then be in his maximum 
profit area if the stock remains relatively unchanged. Unfortunately, it is difficult to 
satisfy both conditions simultaneously. 
The smallest-debit butterfly spreads are those in which the stock is some dis­
tance away from the middle striking price. To see this, note that if the stock were 
well above the middle strike and all the options were at parity, the net debit would 
be zero. Although no one would attempt to establish a butterfly spread with parity 
options because of the risk of early assignment, it may be somewhat useful to try to 
obtain a small debit by taking an opinion on the underlying stock. For example, if 
the stock is close to the higher striking price, the debit would be small normally, but 
the investor would have to be somewhat bearish on the underlying stock in order to 
maximize his profit; that is, the stock would have to decline in price from the upper 
striking price to the middle striking price for the maximum profit to be realized. An 
analogous situation exists when the underlying stock is originally close to the lower 
striking price. The investor could establish the spread for a small debit in this case 
also, but he would now have to be somewhat bullish on the underlying stock in order 
to attempt to realize his maximum profit. 
Example: XYZ is at 70. One may be able to establish a low-debit butterfly spread 
with the 50's, 60's, and 70's if the following prices exist: 
===== PDF page index 229 =====
204 
XYZ common, 70; 
XYZ July 50, 20; 
XYZ July 60, 12; and 
XYZ July 70, 5. 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
The butterfly spread would require a debit of only $100 plus commissions to estab­
lish, because the cost of the calls at the higher and lower strike is 25 points, and a 24-
point credit would be obtained by selling two calls at the middle strike. This is indeed 
a low-cost butterfly spread, but the stock will have to move down in price for much 
of a profit to be realized. The maximum profit of $900 less commissions would be 
realized at 60 at expiration. The strategist would have to be bearish on XYZ to want 
to establish such a spread. 
Without the aid of an example, the reader should be able to determine that if 
XYZ were originally at 50, a low-cost butterfly spread could be established by buying 
the 50, selling two 60's, and buying a 70. In this case, however, the investor would 
have to be bullish on the stock, because he would want it to move up to 60 by expi­
ration in order for the maximum profit to be realized. 
In general, then, if the butterfly spread is to be established at an extremely low 
debit, the spreader will have to make a decision as to whether he wants to be bullish 
or bearish on the underlying stock. Many strategists prefer to remain as neutral as 
possible on the underlying stock at all times in any strategy. This philosophy would 
lead to slightly higher debits, such as the $300 debit in the example at the beginning 
of this chapter, but would theoretically have a better chance of making money 
because there would be a profit if the stock remained relatively unchanged, the most 
probable occurrence. 
In either philosophy, there are other considerations for the butterfly spread. 
The best butterfly spreads are generally found on the more expensive and/or more 
volatile stocks that have striking prices spaced 10 or 20 points apart. In these situa­
tions, the maximum profit is large enough to overcome the weight of the commission 
costs involved in the butterfly spread. When one establishes butterfly spreads on 
lower-priced stocks whose striking prices are only 5 points apart, he is normally put­
ting himself at a disadvantage unless the debit is extremely small. One exception to 
this rule is that attractive situations are often found on higher-priced stocks with 
striking prices 5 points apart (50, 55, and 60, for example). They do exist from time 
to time. 
In analyzing butterfly spreads, one commonly works with closing prices. It was 
mentioned earlier that using closing prices for analysis can prove somewhat mislead­
ing, since the actual execution will have to be done at bid and asked prices, and these 
===== PDF page index 230 =====
Chapter 10: The Butterfly Spread 205 
may differ somewhat from closing prices. Normally, this difference is small, but since 
there are three different calls involved in a butterfly spread, the difference could be 
substantial. Therefore, it is usually necessary to check the appropriate bid and asked 
price for each call before entering the spread, in order to be able to place a reason­
able debit on the order. As with other types of spreads, the butterfly spread order can 
be placed as one order. 
Before moving on to discuss follow-up action, it may be worthwhile to describe 
a tactic for stocks with 5 points between striking prices. For example, the butterfly 
spreader might work with strikes of 45, 50, and 60. If he sets up the usual type of but­
terfly spread, he would end up with a position that has too much risk near 60 and very 
little or none at all near 45. If this is what he wants, fine; but if he wants to remain 
neutral, the standard type of butterfly spread will have to be modified slightly. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
July 45 call, 7; 
July 50 call, 5; and 
July 60 call, 2. 
The normal type of butterfly spread- buying one 45, selling two 50's, and buying one 
60 - can actually be done for a credit of 1 point. However, the profitability is no 
longer symmetric about the middle striking price. In this example, the investor can­
not lose to the downside because, even if the stock collapses and all the calls expire 
worthless, he will still make his I-point credit. However, to the upside, there is risk: 
If XYZ is anywhere above 60 at expiration, the risk is 4 points. This is no longer a neu­
tral position. The fact that the lower strike is only 5 points from the middle strike 
while the higher strike is 10 points away has made this a somewhat bearish position. 
If the spreader wants to be neutral and still use these striking prices, he will have to 
put on two bull spreads and only one bear spread. That is, he should: 
Buy 2 July 45's: 
Sell 3 July 50's: 
Buy 1 July 60: 
$1,400 debit 
$1,500 credit 
$200 debit 
This position now has a net debit of $100 but has a better balance of risk at either 
end. If XYZ drops and is below 45 at expiration, the spreader will lose his $100 ini­
tial debit. But now, if XYZ is at or above 60 at expiration, he will lose $100 in that 
range also. Thus, by establishing two bull spreads with a 5-point difference between 
===== PDF page index 231 =====
206 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
strikes versus one bear spread with a IO-point difference between strikes, the risk has 
been balanced at both ends. When one uses strike prices that are not evenly spaced 
apart, his margin requirement increases substantially. In such a case, one has to mar­
gin the individual component spreads separately. Therefore, in this example, he 
would have to pay for the two bull spreads ( $200 each, for a total of $400) and then 
margin the additional call bear spread ($700: the $1,000 difference in the strikes, less 
the $300 credit taken in for that portion of the spread). Hence, in this example, the 
margin requirement would be $1,100, even though the risk is only $100. Technically, 
of that $1,100 requirement, the spread trader pays out only $100 in cash (the actual 
debit of the spread), and the rest of the requirement can be satisfied with excess 
equity in his account. 
The same analysis obviously applies whenever 5-point striking price intervals 
exist. There are numerous combinations that could be worked out for lower-priced 
stocks by merely skipping over a striking price ( using the 25's, 30's, and 40's, for exam­
ple). Although there are not normally many stocks trading over $100 per share, the 
same analysis is applicable using 130's, 140's, and 160's, for example. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
Since the butterfly spread has limited risk by its construction, there is usually little 
that the spreader has to do in the way of follow-up action other than avoiding early 
exercise or possibly dosing out the position early to take profits or limit losses even 
further. The only part of the spread that is subject to assignment is the call at the mid­
dle strike. If this call trades at or near parity, in-the-money, the spread should be 
closed. This may happen before expiration if the underlying stock is about to go ex­
dividend. It should be noted that accepting assignment will not increase the risk of 
the spread (because any short calls assigned would still be protected by the remain­
ing long calls). However, the margin requirement would change substantially, since 
one would now have a synthetic put (long calls, short stock) in place. Plus, there may 
be more onerous commissions for trading stock. Therefore, it is usually wise to avoid 
assignment in a butterfly spread, or in any spread, for that matter. 
If the stock is near the middle strike after a reasonable amount of time has 
passed, an unrealized profit will begin to accrue to the spreader. If one feels that the 
underlying stock is about to move away from the middle striking price and thereby 
jeopardize these profits, it may be advantageous to close the spread to take the avail­
able profit. Be certain to include commission costs when determining if an unreal­
ized profit exists. As a general rule of thumb, if one is doing 10 spreads at a time, he 
===== PDF page index 232 =====
Chapter 10: Tire Butterfly Spread 207 
can estimate that the commission cost for each option is about 1/s point. That is, if one 
has 10 butterfly spreads and the spread is currently at 6 points, he could figure that 
he would net about 5½ points after commissions to close the spread. This 1/s estimate 
is only valid if the spreader has at least 10 options at each strike involved in a spread. 
Normally, one would not close the spread early to limit losses, since these loss­
es are limited to the original net debit in any case. However, if the original debit was 
large and the stock is beginning to break out above the higher strike or to break down 
below the lower strike, the spreader may want to close the spread to limit losses even 
further. 
It has been repeatedly stated that one should not attempt to ''leg" out of a 
spread because of the risk that is incurred if one is wrong. However, there is a 
method of legging out of a butterfly spread that is acceptable and may even be pru­
dent. Since the spread consists of both a bull spread and a bear spread, it may often 
be the case that the stock experiences a relatively substantial move in one direction 
or the other during the life of the butterfly spread, and that the bull spread portion 
or the bear spread portion could be closed out near their maximum profit potentials. 
If this situation arises, the spreader may want to take advantage of it in order to be 
able to profit more if the underlying stock reverses direction and comes back into the 
profit range. 
Exampk: This strategy can be explained by using the initial example from this chap­
ter and then assuming that the stock falls from 60 to 45. Recall that this spread was 
initially established with a 3-point debit and a maximum profit potential of 7 points. 
The profit range was 53 to 67 at July expiration. However, a rather unpleasant situa­
tion has occurred: The stock has fallen quickly and is below the profit range. If the 
spreader does nothing and keeps the spread on, he will lose 3 points at most if the 
stock remains below 50 until July expiration. However, by increasing his risk slightly, 
he may be able to improve his position. Notice in Table 10-3 that the bear spread por­
tion of the overall spread - short July 60, long July 70 - has very nearly reached its 
maximum potential. The bear spread could be bought back for ½ point total (pay 1 
point to buy back the July 60 and receive½ point from selling out the July 70). Thus, 
the spreader could convert the butterfly spread to a bull spread by spending ½ point. 
What would such an action do to his overall position? First, his risk would be 
increased by the ½ point spent to close the bear spread. That is, if XYZ continues to 
remain below 50 until July expiration, he would now lose 3½ rather than 3 points, 
plus commissions in either case. He has, however, potentially helped his chances of 
realizing something close to the maximum profit available from the original butterfly 
spread. 
===== PDF page index 233 =====
208 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
TABLE 10-3. 
Initial spread and current prices. 
Initial Spread Current Prices 
XYZ common: 60 XYZ common: 45 
July 50 call: 12 July 50 call: 2 
July 60 call: 6 July 60 call: 1 
July 70 call: 3 July 70 call: 1/2 
After buying back the bear spread, he is left with the following bull spread: 
Long July 50 call _ N t d b·t 3u, . t 
h l all e e 1 ,2 pom s S ort Ju y 60 c 
He has a bull spread at the total cost paid to date - 3½ points. From the earlier dis­
cussion of bull spreads, the reader should know that the break-even point for this 
position is 53½ at expiration, and it could make a 6½ point profit if XYZ is anywhere 
over 60 at July expiration. Hence, the break-even point for the position was raised 
from 53 to 53½ by the expense of the ½ point to buy back the bear spread. However, 
if the stock should rally back above 60, the strategist will be making a profit nearly 
equal to the original maximum profit that he was aiming for (7 points). Moreover, this 
profit is now available anywhere over 60, not just exactly at 60 as it was in the origi­
nal position. Although the chances of such a rally cannot be considered great, it does 
not cost the spreader much to restructure himself into a position with a much broad­
er maximum profit area. 
A similar situation is available if the underlying stock moves up in price. In that 
case, the bull spread may be able to be removed at nearly its maximum profit poten­
tial, thereby leaving a bear spread. Again, suppose that the same initial spread was 
established but that XYZ has risen to 75. When the underlying stock advances sub­
stantially, the bull spread portion of the butterfly spread may expand to near its max­
imum potential. Since the strikes are 10 points apart in this bull spread, the widest it 
can grow to is 10 points. At the prices shown in Table 10-4, the bull spread - long 
July 50 and short July 60 - has grown to 9½ points. Thus, the bull spread position 
could be removed within ½ point of its maximum profit potential and the original 
butterfly spread would become a bear spread. Note that the closing of the bull spread 
portion generates a 9½ point credit: The July 50 is sold at 25½ and the July 60 is 
bought back at 16. The original butterfly spread was established at a 3-point debit, so 
the net position is the remaining position: 
===== PDF page index 234 =====
Chapter 10: The BatterRy Spread 209 
Long July 70 call . 
Short July 60 call - Net credit 6½ points 
This bear spread has a maximum profit potential of 6½ points anywhere below 60 at 
July expiration. The maximum risk is 3½ points anywhere above 70 at expiration. 
Thus, the original butterfly spread was again converted into a position such that a 
stock price reversal to any price below 60 could produce something close to the max­
imum profit. Moreover, the risk was only increased by an additional ½ point. 
TABLE 10-4. 
Initial spread and new current prices. 
I nitiol Spread 
XYZ common: 60 
XYZ July 50 call: 12 
July 60 call: 6 
July 70 call: 3 
SUMMARY 
Current Prices 
XYZ common: 
July 50 call: 
July 60 call: 
July 70 call: 
75 
25 1/2 
16 
7 
The butterfly spread is a viable, low-cost strategy with both limited profit potential 
and limited risk. It is actually a combination of a bull spread and a bear spread, and 
involves using three striking prices. The risk is limited should the underlying stock 
fall below the lowest strike or rise above the highest strike. The maximum profit is 
obtained at the middle strike. One can keep his initial debits to a minimum by ini­
tially assuming a bullish or bearish posture on the underlying stock. If he would 
rather remain neutral, he will normally have to pay a slightly larger debit to establish 
the spread, but may have a better chance of making money. If the underlying stock 
experiences a large move in one direction or the other prior to expiration, the spread­
er may want to close the profitable side of his butterfly spread near its maximum 
profit potential in order to be able to capitalize on a stock price reversal, should one 
occur. 
===== PDF page index 235 =====
Ratio Call Spreads 
A ratio call spread is a neutral strategy in which one buys a number of calls at a lower 
strike and sells more calls at a higher strike. It is somewhat similar to a ratio write in 
concept, although the spread has less downside risk and normally requires a smaller 
investment than does a ratio write. The ratio spread and ratio write are similar in that 
both involve uncovered calls, and both have profit ranges within which a profit can 
be made at expiration. Other comparisons are demonstrated throughout the chapter. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 44; 
XYZ April 40 call, 5; and 
XYZ April 45 call, 3. 
A 2:1 ratio call spread could be established by buying one April 40 call and simulta­
neously selling two April 45's. This spread would be done for a credit of 1 point - the 
sale of the two April 45's bringing in 6 points and the purchase of the April 40 cost­
ing 5 points. This spread can be entered as one spread order, specifying the net cred­
it or debit for the position. In this case, the spread would be entered at a net credit 
of 1 point. 
Ratio spreads, unlike ratio writes, have a relatively small, limited downside risk. 
In fact, if the spread is established at an initial credit, there is no downside risk at all. 
In a ratio spread, the profit or loss at expiration is constant below the lower striking 
price, because both options would be worthless in that area. In the example above, if 
XYZ is below 40 at April expiration, all the options would expire worthless and the 
spreader would have made a profit of his initial I-point credit, less commissions. This 
I-point gain would occur anywhere below 40 at expiration; it is a constant. 
210 
===== PDF page index 236 =====
Chapter 11: Ratio Call Spreads 211 
The maximum profit at expiration for a ratio spread occurs if the stock is exact­
ly at the striking price of the written options. This is true for nearly all types of strate­
gies involving written options. In the example, if XYZ were at 45 at April expiration, 
the April 45 calls would expire worthless for a gain of $600 on the two of them, and 
the April 40 call would be worth 5 points, resulting in no gain or loss on that call. 
Thus, the total profit would be $600 less commissions. 
The greatest risk in a ratio call spread lies to the upside, where the loss may the­
oretically be unlimited. The upside break-even point in this example is 51, as shown 
in Table 11-1. The table and Figure 11-1 illustrate the statements made in the pre­
ceding paragraphs. 
In a 2:1 ratio spread, two calls are sold for each one purchased. The maximum 
profit amount and the upside break-even point can easily be computed by using the 
following formulae: 
Points of maximum profit = Initial credit + Difference between strikes or 
= Difference between strikes - Initial debit 
Upside break-even point= Higher strike price+ Points of maximum profit 
In the preceding example, the initial credit was 1 point, so the points of maxi­
mum profit = 1 + 5 = 6, or $600. The upside break-even point is then 45 + 6, or 51. 
This agrees with the results determined earlier. Note that if the spread is established 
at a debit rather than a credit, the debit is subtracted from the striking price differ­
ential to determine the points of maximum profit. 
Many neutral investors prefer ratio spreads over ratio writes for two reasons: 
TABLE 11-1. 
Ratio call spread. 
XYZ Price of April 40 Coll April 45 Coll Total 
Expiration Profits Profits Profits 
35 -$ 500 +$ 600 +$100 
40 - 500 + 600 + 100 
42 - 300 + 600 + 300 
45 0 + 600 + 600 
48 + 300 0 + 300 
51 + 600 - 600 0 
55 +1,000 -1,400 - 400 
60 + 1,500 -2,400 - 900 
===== PDF page index 237 =====
212 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
FIGURE 11 • 1. 
Ratio call spread (2: 1 ). 
Stock Price at Expiration 
1. The downside risk or gain is predetermined in the ratio spread at expiration, and 
therefore the position does not require much monitoring on the downside. 
2. The margin investment required for a ratio spread is normally smaller than that 
required for a ratio write, since on the long side one is buying a call rather than 
buying the common stock itself. 
For margin purposes, a ratio spread is really the combination of a bull spread 
and a naked call write. There is no margin requirement for a bull spread other than 
the net debit to establish the bull spread. The net investment for the ratio spread is 
thus equal to the collateral required for the naked calls in the spread plus or minus 
the net debit or credit of the spread. In the example above, there is one naked call. 
The requirement for the naked call is 20% of the stock price plus the call premium, 
less the out-of-the-money amount. So the requirement in the example would be 20% 
of 44, or $880, plus the call premium of $300, less the one point that the stock is 
below the striking price - a $1,080 requirement for the naked call. Since the spread 
was established at a credit of one point, this credit can also be applied against the ini­
tial requirement, thereby reducing that requirement to $980. Since there is a naked 
call in this spread, there will be a mark to market if the stock moves up. Just as was 
recommended for the ratio write, it is recommended that the ratio spreader allow at 
least enough collateral to reach the upside break-even point. Since the upside break­
even point is 51 in this example, the spreader should allow 20% of 51, or $1,020, plus 
===== PDF page index 238 =====
Chapter 11: Ratio Call Spreads 213 
the 6 points that the call would be worth less the 1-point initial net credit - a total of 
$1,520 for this spread ($1,020 + $600 - $100). 
DIFFERING PHILOSOPHIES 
For many strategies, there is more than one philosophy of how to implement the 
strategy. Ratio spreads are no exception, with three philosophies being predominant. 
One philosophy holds that ratio spreading is quite similar to ratio writing - that one 
should be looking for opportunities to purchase an in-the-money call with little or no 
time premium in it so that the ratio spread simulates the profit opportunities from 
the ratio write as closely as possible with a smaller investment. The ratio spreads 
established under this philosophy may have rather large debits if the purchased call 
is substantially in-the-money. Another philosophy of ratio spreading is that spreads 
should be established for credits so that there is no chance of losing money on the 
downside. Both philosophies have merit and both are described. A third philosophy, 
called the "delta spread," is more concerned with neutrality, regardless of the initial 
debit or credit. It is also described. 
RATIO SPREAD AS RATIO WRITE 
There are several spread strategies similar to strategies that involve common stock. In 
this case, the ratio spread is similar to the ratio write. Whenever such a similarity 
exists, it may be possible for the strategist to buy an in-the-money call with little or no 
time premium as a substitute for buying the common stock. This was seen earlier in 
the covered call writing strategy, where it was shown that the purchase of in-the­
money calls or warrants might be a viable substitute for the purchase of stock. If one 
is able to buy an in-the-rrwney call as a substitute for the stock, he will not affect his 
profit potential substantially. When comparing a ratio spread to a ratio write, the max­
imum profit potential and the profit range are reduced by the time value premium 
paid for the long call. If this call is at parity (the time value premium is thus zero), the 
ratio spread and the ratio write have exactly the same profit potential. Moreover, the 
net investment is reduced and there is less downside risk should the stock fall in price 
below the striking price of the purchased call. The spread also involves smaller com­
mission costs than does the ratio write, which involves a stock purchase. The ratio 
writer does receive stock dividends, if any are paid, whereas the spreader does not. 
Example: XYZ is at 50, and an XYZ July 40 call is selling for 11 while an XYZ July 50 
call is selling for 5. Table 11-2 compares the important points between the ratio write 
and the ratio spread. 
===== PDF page index 239 =====
214 
TABLE 11-2. 
Ratio write and ratio spread compared. 
Profit range 
Maximum profit 
Downside risk 
Upside risk 
Initial investment 
Ratio Write: 
Buy XYZ of 50 and 
Sell 2 July SO's at 5 
40 to 60 
10 points 
40 points 
40 points 
$3,000 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Ratio Spread: 
Buy 1 July 40 of 11 and 
Sell 2 July SO's at 5 
41 to 59 
9 points 
1 point 
Unlimited 
$1,600 
In Chapter 6, it was pointed out that ratio writing was one of the better strate­
gies from a probability of profit viewpoint. That is, the profit potential conforms well 
to the expected movement of the underlying stock. The same statement holds true 
for ratio spreads as substitutes for ratio writes. In fact, the ratio spread may often be 
a better position than the ratio write itself, when the long call can be purchased with 
little or no time value premium in it. 
RATIO SPREAD FOR CREDITS 
The second philosophy of ratio spreads is to establish them only for credits. 
Strategists who follow this philosophy generally want a second criterion fulfilled also: 
that the underlying stock be below the striking price of the written calls when the 
spread is established. In fact, the farther the stock is below the strike, the more 
attractive the spread would be. This type of ratio spread has no downside risk 
because, even if the stock collapses, the spreader will still make a profit equal to the 
initial credit received. This application of the ratio spread strategy is actually a sub­
case of the application discussed above. That is, it may be possible both to buy a long 
call for little or no time premium, thereby simulating a ratio write, and also to be able 
to set up the position for a credit. 
Since the underlying stock is generally below the maximum profit point when 
one establishes a ratio spread for a credit, this is actually a mildly bullish position. 
The investor would want the stock to move up slightly in order for his maximum prof­
it potential to be realized. Of course, the position does have unlimited upside risk, so 
it is not an overly bullish strategy. 