
===== PDF page index 88 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 67 
The writer wishing to establish a covered write against XYZ common stock may like 
the protection afforded by the April 40 call, but may not find the return particularly 
attractive. He may be able to improve his return by writing April 45's against part of 
his position. Assume the writer is considering buying 1,000 shares of XYZ. Table 2-18 
compares the attributes of writing the out-of-the-money (April 45) only, or of writing 
only the in-the-money (April 40), or of writing 5 of each. The table is based on a cash 
covered write, but returns and protection would be similar for a margin write. 
Commissions are included in the figures. 
It is easily seen that the "combined" write - half of the position against the April 
40's and the other half against the April 45's - offers the best balance of return and 
protection. The in-the-money call, by itself, provides over 10% downside protection, 
but the 5% return if exercised is less than 1 % per month. Thus, one might not want 
to write April 40's against his entire position, because the potential return is small. At 
the same time, the April 45's, if written against the entire stock position, would pro­
vide for an attractive return if exercised (over 2% per month) but offer only 5% down­
side protection. The combined write, which has the better features of both options, 
offers over 8% return if exercised (11h% per month) and affords over 8% downside 
protection. By writing both calls, the writer has potentially solved the problems inher­
ent in writing entirely out-of-the-moneys or entirely in-the-moneys. The "combined" 
write frees the covered writer from having to initially take a bearish (in-the-money 
write) or bullish (out-of-the-money write) posture on the stock ifhe does not want to. 
This is often necessary on a low-volatility stock trading between striking prices. 
TABLE 2-18. 
Attributes of various writes. 
Buy 1,000 XYZ and sell 
Return if exercised 
Re~rn if unchanged 
Percent protection 
In-the-Money 
Write 
10 April 40's 
5.1% 
5.1% 
10.5% 
Out-of-the-Money 
Write 
l O April 45's 
12.2% 
6.0% 
5.7% 
Write 
Both Calls 
5 April 40's and 
5 April 45's 
8.4% 
5.4% 
8.1% 
For those who prefer a graphic representation, the profit graph shown in Figure 
2-2 compares the combined write of both calls with either the in-the-money write or 
the out-of-the-money write (dashed lines). It can be observed that all three choices 
are equal if XYZ is near 42 at expiration; all three lines intersect there. 
===== PDF page index 89 =====
68 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
FIGURE 2-2. 
Comparison: combined write vs. in-the-money write and out-of-the­
money write. 
Out-of-the-Money Write 
, 
.-------► ,,, Combined Write , 
/ In-the-Money Write 
-----------➔ 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Since this technique can be useful in providing diversification between protec­
tion and return, not only for an individual position but for a large part of a portfolio, 
it may be useful to see exactly how to compute the potential returns and break-even 
points. Tables 2-19 and 2-20 calculate the return if exercised and the return if 
unchanged using the prices from the previous example. Assume XYZ will pay $1 per 
share in dividends before April expiration. 
Note that the profit calculations are similar to those described in earlier sec­
tions, except that now there are two prices for stock sales since there are two options 
involved. In the "return if exercised" section, half of the stock is sold at 45 and half is 
sold at 40. The "return if unchanged" calculation is somewhat more complicated now, 
TABLE 2-19. 
Net investment-cash account. 
Buy 1,000 XYZ at 42 
Plus stock commissions 
Less options premiums: 
Sell 5 April 40's at 4 
Sell 5 April 45's at 2 
Plus total option commissions 
Net investment 
+ 
$42,000 
460 
- 2,000 
1,000 
+ 140 
$39,600 
===== PDF page index 90 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
TABLE 2-20. 
Net return-cash account. 
Return If Exercised 
Sell 500 XYZ at 45 $22,500 
Sell 500 XYZ at 40 20,000 
Less total stock sale 
commissions 560 
Plus dividends ($1 /share) + 1,000 
Less net investment - 39,600 
Net profit if exercised $ 3,340 
Return if exercised = 3,340 = 8_4% 
(cash) 39,600 
69 
Return If Unchanged 
Unchanged stock value (500 
shares at 42) $21,000 
Sell 500 at 40 + 20,000 
Commissions on sale at 40 280 
Plus dividends ($1 /share) . + 1,000 
Less net investment - 39,600 
Net profit if unchanged $ 2, 120 
Return if unchanged = 2, 120 = 5 _4% 
(cash) 39,600 
because half of the stock will be called away if it remains unchanged (the in-the­
money portion) whereas the other half will not. This is consistent with the method of 
calculating the return if unchanged that was introduced previously. 
The break-even point is calculated as before. The "total stock cost to expiration" 
would be the net investment of $39,600 less the $1,000 received in dividends. This is 
a total of $38,600. On a per-share basis, then, the break-even point of 38.6 is 8.1 % 
below the current stock price of 42. Thus, the amount of percentage downside pro­
tection is 8.1 %. 
The foregoing calculations clearly demonstrate that the returns on the "com­
bined" write are not exactly the averages of the in-the-money and out-of-the-money 
returns, because of the different commission calculations at various stock prices. 
However, if one is working with a computer-generated list and does not want to both­
er to calculate exactly the return on the combined write, he can arrive at a relatively 
close approximation by averaging the returns for the in-the-money write and the out­
of-the-money write. 
OTHER DIVERSIFICATION TECHNIQUES 
Holders of large positions in a particular stock may want even more diversification 
than can be provided by writing against two different striking prices. Institutions, 
pension funds, and large individual stockholders may fall into this category. It is often 
advisable for such large stockholders to diversify their writing over time as well as 
over at least two striking prices. By diversifying over time - for example, writing one-
===== PDF page index 91 =====
70 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
third of the position against near-term calls, one-third against middle-term calls, and 
the remaining third against long-term calls - one can gain several benefits. First, all 
of one's positions need not be adjusted at the same time. This includes either having 
the stock called away or buying back one written call and selling another. Moreover, 
one is not subject only to the level of option premiums that exist at the time one 
series of calls expires. For example, if one writes only 9-month calls and then rolls 
them over when they expire, he may unnecessarily be subjecting himself to the 
potential of lower returns. If option premium levels happen to be low when it is time 
for this 9-month call writer to sell more calls, he will be establishing a less-than-opti­
mum write for up to 9 months. By spreading his writing out over time, he would, at 
worst, be subjecting only one-third of his holding to the low-premium write. 
Hopefully, premiums would expand before the next eXpiration 3 months later, and he 
would then be getting a relatively better premium on the next third of his portfolio. 
There is an important aside here: The individual or relatively small investor who 
owns only enough stock to write one series of options should generally not write the 
longest-term calls for this very reason. He may not be obtaining a particularly attrac­
tive level of premiums, but may feel he is forced to retain the position until expira­
tion. Thus, he could be in a relatively poor write for as long as 9 months. Finally, this 
type of diversification may also lead to having calls at various striking prices as· the 
market fluctuates cyclically. All of one's stock is not necessarily committed at one 
price if this diversification technique is employed. 
This concludes the discussion of how to establish a covered writing position 
against stock. Covered writes against other types of securities are described later. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
Establishing a covered write, or any option position for that matter, is only part of the 
strategist's job. Once the position has been taken, it must be monitored closely so that 
adjustments may be made should the stock drop too far in price. Moreover, even if 
the stock remains relatively unchanged, adjustments will need to be made as the writ­
ten call approaches expiration. 
Some writers take no follow-up action at all, preferring to let a stock be called 
away if it rises above the striking price at the expiration of the option, or preferring 
to let the original expire worthless if the stock is below the strike. These are not 
always optimum actions; there may be much more decision making involved. 
Follow-up action can be divided into three general categories: 
===== PDF page index 92 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 71 
1. protective action to take if the stock drops, 
2. aggressive action to take when the stock rises, or 
3. action to avoid assignment if the time premium disappears from an in-the-money 
call. 
There may be times when one decides to close the entire position before expiration 
or to let the stock be called away. These cases are discussed as well. 
PROTECTIVE ACTION IF THE UNDERLYING STOCK DECLINES IN PRICE 
The covered writer who does not take protective action in the face of a relatively sub­
stantial drop in price by the underlying stock may be risking the possibility of large 
losses. Since covered writing is a strategy with limited profit potential, one should 
also take care to limit losses. Otherwise, one losing position can negate several win­
ning positions. The simplest form of follow-up action in a decline is to merely close 
out the position. This might be done if the stock declines by a certain percentage, or 
if the stock falls below a technical support level. Unfortunately, this method of defen­
sive action may prove to be an inferior one. The investor will often do better to con­
tinue to sell more time value in the form of additional option premiums. 
Follow-up action is generally taken by buying back the call that was originally 
written and then writing another call, with a different striking price and/or expiration 
date, in its place. Any adjustment of this sort is referred to as a rolling action. When 
the underlying stock drops in price, one generally buys back the original call - pre­
sumably at a profit since the underlying stock has declined - and then sells a call with 
a lower striking price. This is known as rolling down, since the new option has a lower 
striking price. 
Example: The covered writing position described as "buy XYZ at 51, sell the XYZ 
January 50 call at 6" would have a maximum profit potential at expiration of 5 points. 
Downside protection is 6 points down to a stock price of 45 at expiration. These fig­
ures do not include commissions, but for the purposes of an elementary example, the 
commissions will be ignored. 
If the stock begins to decline in price, taking perhaps two months to fall to 45, 
the following option prices might exist: 
XYZ common, 45; 
XYZ January 50 call, l; and 
XYZ January 45 call, 4. 
===== PDF page index 93 =====
72 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
• 
The covered writer of the January 50 would, at this time, have a small unrealized loss 
of one point in his overall position: His loss on the common stock is 6 points, but he 
has a 5-point gain in the January 50 call. (This demonstrates that prior to expiration, 
a loss occurs at the "break-even" point.) If the stock should continue to fall from 
these levels, he could have a larger loss at expiration. The call, selling for one point, 
only affords one more point of downside protection. If a further stock price drop is 
anticipated, additional downside protection can be obtained by rolling down. In this 
example, if one were to buy back the January 50 call at 1 and sell the January 45 at 
4, he would be rolling down. This would increase his protection by another three 
points - the credit generated by buying the 50 call at 1 and selling the 45 call at 4. 
Hence, his downside break-even point would be 42 after rolling down. 
Moreover, if the stock were to remain unchanged - that is, if XYZ were exactly 
45 at January expiration - the writer would make an additional $300. If he had not 
rolled down, the most additional income that he could make, if XYZ remained 
unchanged, would be the remaining $100 from the January 50 call. So rolling down 
gives more downside protection against a further drop in stock price and may also 
produce additional income if the stock price stabilizes. 
In order to more exactly evaluate the overall effect that was obtained by rolling 
down in this example, one can either compute a profit table (Table 2-21) or draw a 
net profit graph (Figure 2-3) that compares the original covered write with the 
rolled-down position. 
Note that the rolled-down position has a smaller maximum profit potential than 
the original position did. This is because, by rolling down to a January 45 call, the 
writer limits his profits anywhere above 45 at expiration. He has committed himself 
to sell stock 5 points lower than the original position, which utilized a January 50 call 
and thus had limited profits above 50. Rolling down generally reduces the maximum 
TABLE 2·21. 
Profit table. 
XYZ Price at Profit from Profit from 
Expiration January 50 Write Rolled Position 
40 -$500 -200 
42 - 300 0 
45 0 +300 
48 + 300 +300 
50 + 500 +300 
60 + 500 +300 
===== PDF page index 94 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
FIGURE 2-3. 
Comparison: original covered write vs. rolled-down write. 
+$500 
c: +$300 
0 
~ 
]-
iii 
en en 
0 ...J 
5 
-e a. 
$0 
Original Write 
Rolled-Down Write 
50 
Stock Price at Expiration 
73 
profit potential of the covered write. Limiting the maximum profit may be a second­
ary consideration, however, when a stock is breaking downward. Additional downside 
protection is often a more pressing criterion in that case. 
Anywhere below 45 at expiration, the rolled-down position does $300 better 
than the original position, because of the $300 credit generated from rolling down. 
In fact, the rolled-down position will outperform the original position even if the 
stock rallies back to, but not above, a price of 48. At 48 at expiration, the two posi­
tions are equal, both producing a $300 profit. If the stock should reverse direction 
and rally back above 48 by expiration, the writer would have been better off not to 
have rolled down. All these facts are clear from Table 2-21 and Figure 2-3. 
Consequently, the only case in which it does not pay to roll down is the one in 
which the stock experiences a reversal - a rise in price after the initial drop. The 
selection of where to roll down is important, because rolling down too early or at an 
inappropriate price could limit the returns. Technical support levels of the stock are 
often useful in selecting prices at which to roll down. If one rolls down after techni­
cal support has been broken, the chances of being caught in a stock-price-reversal 
situation would normally be reduced. 
The above example is rather simplistic; in actual practice, more complicated sit­
uations may arise, such as a sudden and fairly steep decline in price by the underly­
ing stock. This may present the writer with what is called a locked-in loss. This means, 
simply, that there is no option to which the writer can roll down that will provide him 
===== PDF page index 95 =====
74 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
with enough premium to realize any profit if the stock were then called away at expi­
ration. These situations arise more commonly on lower-priced stocks, where the 
striking prices are relatively far apart in percentage terms. Out-of-the-money writes 
are more susceptible to this problem than are in-the-money writes. Although it is not 
emotionally satisfying to be in an investment position that cannot produce a profit -
at least for a limited period of time - it may still be beneficial to roll down to protect 
as much of the stock price decline as possible. 
Example: For the covered write described as "buy XYZ at 20, sell the January 20 call 
at 2," the stock unexpectedly drops very quickly to 16, and the following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 16; 
XYZ January 20 call,½; and 
XYZ January 15 call, 2½. 
The covered writer is faced with a difficult choice. He currently has an unrealized 
loss of 2½ points - a 4-point losson the stock which is partially offset by a 1 ½-point 
gain on the January 20 call. This represents a fairly substantial percentage loss on his 
investment in a short period of time. He could do nothing, hoping for the stock to 
recover its loss. Unfortunately, this may prove to be wishful thinking. 
If he considers rolling down, he will not be excited by what he sees. Suppose 
that the writer wants to roll down from the January 20 to the January 15. He would 
thus buy the January 20 at ½ and sell the January 15 at 2½, for a net credit of 2 
points. By rolling down, he is obligating himself to sell his stock at 15, the striking 
price of the January 15 call. Suppose XYZ were above 15 in January and were called 
away. How would the writer do? He would lose 5 points on his stock, since he origi­
nally bought it at 20 and is selling it at 15. This 5-point loss is substantially offset by 
his option profits, which amount to 4 points: 1 ½ points of profit on the January 20, 
sold at 2 and bought back at ½, plus the 2½ points received from the sale of the 
January 15. However, his net result is a 1-point loss, since he lost 5 points on the stock 
and made only 4 points on the options. Moreover, this 1-point loss is the best that he 
can hope for! This is true because, as has been demonstrated several times, a covered 
writing position makes its maximum profit anywhere above the striking price. Thus, 
by rolling down to the 15 strike, he has limited the position severely, to the extent of 
"locking in a loss." 
Even considering what has been shown about this loss, it is still correct for this 
writer to roll down to the January 15. Once the stock has fallen to 16, there is noth­
ing anybody can do about the unrealized losses. However, if the writer rolls down, he 
can prevent the losses from accumulating at a faster rate. In fact, he will do better by 