
===== PDF page index 775 =====
726 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
So, is there a better alternative? Or should one just pack it in, buy some index 
funds, and forget it? As an option strategist, one should most certainly believe that 
there's something better than buying the index fund. The alternative of volatility trad­
ing offers significant advantages in terms of the factors that make directional trading 
difficult. 
If one finds that he is able to handle the rigors of directional trading, then stick 
with that approach. You might want to add some volatility trading to your arsenal, 
though, just to be safe. However, if one finds that directional trading is just too time­
consuming, or you have trouble utilizing stops properly, or are constantly getting 
whipsawed, then it's time to concentrate more heavily on volatility trading, preferably 
in the form of straddle buying. 
===== PDF page index 776 =====
CHAPTER 36 
The Basics of 
Volatility Trading 
Volatility trading first attracted mathematically oriented traders who noticed that the 
market's prediction of forthcoming volatility - for example, implied volatility - was 
substantially out of line with what one might reasonably expect should happen. 
Moreover, many of these traders (market-makers, arbitrageurs, and others) had 
found great difficulties with keeping a "delta neutral" position neutral. Seeking a bet­
ter way to trade without having a market opinion on the underlying security, they 
turned to volatility trading. This is not to suggest that volatility trading eliminates all 
market risk, turning it all into volatility risk, for example. But it does suggest that a 
certain segment of the option trading population can handle the risk of volatility with 
more deference and aplomb than they can handle price risk 
Simply stated, it seems like a much easier task to predict volatility than to pre­
dict prices. That is said notwithstanding the great bull market of the 1990s, in which 
every investor who strongly participated certainly feels that he understands how to 
predict prices. Remember not to confuse brains with a bull market. Consider the chart 
in Figure 36-1. This seems as if it might be a good stock to trade: Buy it near the lows 
and sell it near the highs, perhaps even selling it short near the highs and covering 
when it later declines. It appears to have been in a trading range for a long time, so 
that after each purchase or sale, it returns at least to the midpoint of its trading range 
and sometimes even continues on to the other side of the range. There is no scale on 
the chart, but that doesn't change the fact that it appears to be a tradable entity. In 
fact, this is a chart of implied volatility of the options on a major U.S. corporation. It 
really doesn't matter which one (it's IBM), because the implied volatility chart of near­
ly every stock, index, or futures contract has a similar pattern - a trading range. The 
only time that implied volatility will totally break out of its "normal" range is if some­
thing material happens to change the fundamentals of the way the stock moves - a 
takeover bid, for example, or perhaps a major acquisition or other dilution of the stock 
727 
===== PDF page index 777 =====
728 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 36-1. 
A sample chart. 
Buy at these points. 
So, many traders observed this pattern and have become adherents of trying to 
predict volatility. Notice that if one is able to isolate volatility, he doesn't care where 
the stock price goes he is just concerned with buying volatility near the bottom of 
the range and selling it when it gets back to the middle or high end of the range, or 
vice versa. In real life, it is nearly impossible for a public customer to be able to iso­
late volatility so specifically. He will have to pay some attention to the stock price, but 
he still is able to establish positions in which the direction of the stock price is irrel­
evant to the outcome of the position. This quality is appealing to many investors, who 
have repeatedly found it difficult to predict stock prices. Moreover, an approach such 
as this should work in both bull and bear markets. Thus, volatility trading appeals to 
a great number of individuals. Just remember that, for you personally to operate a 
strategy properly, you must find that it appeals to your own philosophy of trading. 
Trying to use a strategy that you find uncomfortable will only lead to losses and frus­
tration. So, if this somewhat neutral approach to option trading sounds interesting to 
you, then read on. 
DEFINITIONS OF VOLATILITY 
Volatility is merely the term that is used to describe how fast a stock, future, or index 
changes in price. When one speaks of volatility in connection with options, there are 
two types of volatility that are important. The first is historical volatility, which is a 
measure of how fast the underlying instrument has been changing in price. The other 
is implied volatility, which is the option market's prediction of the volatility of the 
===== PDF page index 778 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 729 
underlying over the life of the option. The computation and comparison of these two 
measures can aid immensely in predicting the forthcoming volatility of the underly­
ing instrument - a crucial matter in determining today's option prices. 
Historical volatility can be measured with a specific formula, as shown in the · 
chapter on mathematical applications. It is merely the formula for standard deviation 
as contained in most elementary books on statistics. The important point to under­
stand is that it is an exact calculation, and there is little debate over how to compute 
historical volatility. It is not important to know what the actual measurement means. 
That is, if one says that a certain stock has a historical volatility of 20%, that by itself 
is a relatively meaningless number to anyone but an ardent statistician. However, it 
can be used for comparative purposes. 
The standard deviation is expressed as a percent. One can determine that the 
historical volatility of the broad stock market has usually been in the range of 15% to 
20%. A very volatile stock might have an historical volatility in excess of 100%. These 
numbers can be compared to each other, so that one might say that a stock with the 
latter historical volatility is five times more volatile that the "stock market." So, the 
historical volatility of one instrument can be compared with that of another instru­
ment in order to determine which one is more volatile. That in itself is a useful func­
tion of historical volatility, but its uses go much farther than that. 
Historical volatility can be measured over different time periods to give one a 
sense of how volatile the underlying has been over varying lengths of time. For exam­
ple, it is common to compute a 10-day historical volatility, as well as a 20-day, 50-day, 
and even 100-day. In each case, the results are annualized so that one can compare 
the figures directly. 
Consider the chart in Figure 36-2. It shows a stock (although it could be a 
futures contract or index, too) that was meandering in a rather tight range for quite 
some time. At the point marked "A" on the chart, it was probably at its least volatile. 
At that time, the 10-dayvolatility might have been something quite low, say 20%. The 
price movements directly preceding point A had been very small. However, prior to 
that time the stock had been more volatile, so longer-term measures of the historical 
volatility would shown higher numbers. The possible measures of historical volatility, 
then at point A, might have been something like: 
10-day historical volatility: 20% 
20-day historical volatility: 23% 
50-day historical volatility: 35% 
100-day historical volatility: 45% 
A pattern of historical volatilities of this sort describes a stock that has been 
slowing down lately. 
===== PDF page index 779 =====
730 
FIGURE 36-2. 
Sample stock chart. 
:::::::::r;~.w· r 
I 
, .. ~ 
n 
I 
ll•• ~N 
IT 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatllity 
: 
I 
I 
j 
j 
~ 
JI 
• I' 
'Vn ~- A 
Its price movements have been less extreme in the near term. 
Again referring to Figure 36-2, note that shortly after point A, the stock jumped 
much higher over a short period of time. Price action like this increases the implied 
volatility dramatically. And, at the far right edge of the chart, the stock had stopped 
rising but was swinging back and forth in far more rapid fashion than it had been at 
most other points on the chart. Violent action in a back-and-forth manner can often 
produce a higher historical volatility reading that straight-line move can; it's just the 
way the numbers work out. So, by the far right edge of the chart, the 10-day histori­
cal volatility would have increased rather dramatically, while the longer-term meas­
ures wouldn't be so high because they would still contain the price action that 
occurred prior to point A. 
At the far right edge of Figure 36-2, these figures might apply: 
l 0-day historical volatility: 80% 
20-day historical volatility: 75% 
50-day historical volatility: 60% 
l 00-day historical volatility: 55% 
With this alignment of historical volatilities, one can see that the stock has been 
more volatile recently than in the more distant past. In Chapter 38 on the distribu­
tion of stock prices, we will discuss in some detail just which one, if any, of these his­
torical volatilities one should use as "the" historical volatility input into option and 
===== PDF page index 780 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 731 
probability models. We need to be able to make volatility estimates in order to deter­
mine whether or not a strategy might be successful, and to determine whether the 
current option price is a relatively cheap one or a relatively expensive one. For exam­
ple, one can't just say, "I think XYZ is going to rise at least 18 points by February expi­
ration." There needs to be some basis in fact for such a statement and, lacking inside 
information about what the company might announce between now and February, 
that basis should be statistics in the form of volatility projections. 
Historical volatility is, of course, useful as an input to the (Black-Scholes) option 
model. In fact, the volatility input to any model is crucial because the volatility com­
ponent is such a major factor in determining the price of an option. Furthermore, 
historical volatility is useful for more than just estimating option prices. It is neces­
sary for making stock price projections and calculating distributions, too, as will be 
shown when those topics are discussed later. Any time one asks the question, "What 
is the probability of the stock moving from here to there, or of exceeding a particu­
lar target price?" the answer is heavily dependent on the volatility of the underlying 
stock (or index or futures). 
It is obvious from the above example that historical volatility can change dra­
matically for any particular instrument. Even if one were to stick with just one 
measure of historical volatility ( the 20-day historical is commonly the most popular 
measure), it changes with great frequency. Thus, one can never be certain that bas­
ing option price predictions or stock price distributions on the current historical 
volatility will yield the "correct" results. Statistical volatility may change as time 
goes forward, in which case your projections would be incorrect. Thus, it is impor­
tant to make projections that are on the conservative side. 
ANOTHER APPROACH: GARCH 
GARCH stands for Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity, 
which is why it's shortened to GARCH. It is a technique for forecasting volatility that 
some analysts say produces better projections than using historical volatility alone or 
implied volatility alone. GARCH was created in the 1980s by specialists in the field of 
econometrics. It incorporates both historical and implied volatility, plus one can throw 
in a constant ("fudge factor"). In essence, though, the user of GARCH volatility mod­
els has to make some predictions or decisions about the weighting of the factors used 
for the estimate. By its very nature, then, it can be just as vague as the situations 
described in the previous section. 
The model can "learn," though, if applied correctly. That is, if one makes a 
volatility prediction for today (using GARCH, let's say), but it turns out that the actu-
===== PDF page index 781 =====
732 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
al volatility was lower, then when you make the volatility prediction for tomorrow, 
you'll probably want to adjust it downward, using the experience of the real world, 
where you see volatility declining. This also incorporates the common-sense notion 
that volatility tends to remain the same; that is, tomorrow's volatility is likely to be 
much like today's. Of course, that's a little bit like saying tomorrow's weather is likely 
to be the same as today's (which it is, two-thirds of the time, according to statistics). 
It's just that when a tornado hits, you have to realize that your forecast could be wrong. 
The same thing applies to GAR CH volatility projections. They can be wrong, too. 
So, GARCH does not do a perfect job of estimating and forecasting volatility. In 
fact, it might not even be superior, from a strategist's viewpoint, to using the simple 
minimum/maximum techniques outlined in the previous section. It is really best 
geared to predicting short-term volatility and is favored most heavily by dealers in 
currency options who must adjust their markets constantly. For longer-term volatility 
projections, which is what a position trader of volatility is interested in, GARCH may 
not be all that useful. However, it is considered state-of-the-art as far as volatility pre­
dicting goes, so it has a following among theoretically oriented traders and analysts. 
MOVING AVERAGES 
Some traders try to use moving averages of daily composite implied volatility read­
ings, or use a smoothing of recent past historical volatility readings to make volatility 
estimates. As mentioned in the chapter on mathematical applications, once the com­
posite daily implied volatility has been computed, it was recommended that a 
smoothing effect be obtained by taking a moving average of the 20 or 30 days' 
implied volatilities. In fact, an exponential moving average was recommended, 
because it does not require one to keep accessing the last 20 or 30 days' worth of data 
in order to compute the moving average. Rather, the most recent exponential mov­
ing average is all that's needed in order to compute the next one. 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
Implied volatility has been mentioned many times already, but we want to expand on 
its concept before getting deeper into its measure and uses later in this section. 
Implied volatility pertains only to options, although one can aggregate the implied 
volatilities of the various options trading on a particular underlying instrument to 
produce a single number, which is often referred to as the implied volatility of the 
underlying. 
===== PDF page index 782 =====
732 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
al volatility was lower, then when you make the volatility prediction for tomorrow, 
you'll probably want to adjust it downward, using the experience of the real world, 
where you see volatility declining. This also incorporates the common-sense notion 
that volatility tends to remain the same; that is, tomorrow's volatility is likely to be 
much like today's. Of course, that's a little bit like saying tomorrow's weather is likely 
to be the same as today's (which it is, two-thirds of the time, according to statistics). 
It's just that when a tornado hits, you have to realize that your forecast could be wrong. 
The same thing applies to GARCH volatility projections. They can be wrong, too. 
So, GARCH does not do a perfect job of estimating and forecasting volatility. In 
fact, it might not even be superior, from a strategist's viewpoint, to using the simple 
minimum/maximum techniques outlined in the previous section. It is really best 
geared to predicting short-term volatility and is favored most heavily by dealers in 
currency options who must adjust their markets constantly. For longer-term volatility 
projections, which is what a position trader of volatility is interested in, GAR CH may 
not be all that useful. However, it is considered state-of-the-art as far as volatility pre­
dicting goes, so it has a following among theoretically oriented traders and analysts. 
MOVING AVERAGES 
Some traders try to use moving averages of daily composite implied volatility read­
ings, or use a smoothing of recent past historical volatility readings to make volatility 
estimates. As mentioned in the chapter on mathematical applications, once the com­
posite daily implied volatility has been computed, it was recommended that a 
smoothing effect be obtained by taking a moving average of the 20 or 30 days' 
implied volatilities. In fact, an exponential moving average was recommended, 
because it does not require one to keep accessing the last 20 or 30 days' worth of data 
in order to compute the moving average. Rather, the most recent exponential mov­
ing average is all that's needed in order to compute the next one. 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
Implied volatility has been mentioned many times already, but we want to expand on 
its concept before getting deeper into its measure and uses later in this section. 
Implied volatility pertains only to options, although one can aggregate the implied 
volatilities of the various options trading on a particular underlying instrument to 
produce a single number, which is often referred to as the implied volatility of the 
underlying. 
===== PDF page index 783 =====
732 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
al volatility was lower, then when you make the volatility prediction for tomorrow, 
you'll probably want to adjust it downward, using the experience of the real world, 
where you see volatility declining. This also incorporates the common-sense notion 
that volatility tends to remain the same; that is, tomorrow's volatility is likely to be 
much like today's. Of course, that's a little bit like saying tomorrow's weather is likely 
to be the same as today's (which it is, two-thirds of the time, according to statistics). 
It's just that when a tornado hits, you have to realize that your forecast could be wrong. 
The same thing applies to GARCH volatility projections. They can be wrong, too. 
So, GAR CH does not do a perfect job of estimating and forecasting volatility. In 
fact, it might not even be superior, from a strategist's viewpoint, to using the simple 
minimum/maximum techniques outlined in the previous section. It is really best 
geared to predicting short-term volatility and is favored most heavily by dealers in 
currency options who must adjust their markets constantly. For longer-term volatility 
projections, which is what a position trader of volatility is interested in, GARCH may 
not be all that useful. However, it is considered state-of-the-art as far as volatility pre­
dicting goes, so it has a following among theoretically oriented traders and analysts. 
MOVING AVERAGES 
Some traders try to use moving averages of daily composite implied volatility read­
ings, or use a smoothing of recent past historical volatility readings to make volatility 
estimates. As mentioned in the chapter on mathematical applications, once the com­
posite daily implied volatility has been computed, it was recommended that a 
smoothing effect be obtained by taking a moving average of the 20 or 30 days' 
implied volatilities. In fact, an exponential moving average was recommended, 
because it does not require one to keep accessing the last 20 or 30 days' worth of data 
in order to compute the moving average. Rather, the most recent exponential mov­
ing average is all that's needed in order to compute the next one. 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
Implied volatility has been mentioned many times already, but we want to expand on 
its concept before getting deeper into its measure and uses later in this section. 
Implied volatility pertains only to options, although one can aggregate the implied 
volatilities of the various options trading on a particular underlying instrument to 
produce a single number, which is often referred to as the implied volatility of the 
underlying. 
===== PDF page index 784 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 733 
At any one point in time, a trader knows for certain the following items that 
affect an option's price: stock price, strike price, time to expiration, interest rate, and 
dividends. The only remaining factor is volatility - in fact, implied volatility. It is the 
big "fudge factor" in option trading. If implied volatility is too high, options will be 
overpriced. That is, they will be relatively expensive. On the other hand, if implied 
volatility is too low, options will be cheap or underpriced. The terms "overpriced" and 
"underpriced" are not really used by theoretical option traders much anymore, 
because their usage implies that one knows what the option should be worth. In the 
modem vernacular, one would say that the options are trading with a "high implied 
volatility" or a "low implied volatility," meaning that one has some sense of where 
implied volatility has been in the past, and the current measure is thus high or low in 
comparison. 
Essentially, implied volatility is the option market's guess at the forthcoming sta­
tistical volatility of the underlying over the life of the option in question. If traders 
believe that the underlying will be volatile over the life of the option, then they will 
bid up the option, making it more highly priced. Conversely, if traders envision a non­
volatile period for the stock, they will not pay up for the option, preferring to bid 
lower; hence the option will be relatively low-priced. The important thing to note is 
that traders normally do not know the future. They have no way of knowing, for sure, 
how volatile the underlying is going to be during the life of the option. 
Having said that, it would be unrealistic to assume that inside information does 
not leak into the marketplace. That is, if certain people possess nonpublic knowledge 
about a company's earnings, new product announcement, takeover bid, and so on, 
they will aggressively buy or bid for the options and that will increase implied volatil­
ity. So, in certain cases, when one sees that implied volatility has shot up quickly, it is 
perhaps a signal that some traders do indeed know the future - at least with respect 
to a specific corporate announcement that is about to be made. 
However, most of the time there is not anyone trading with inside information. 
Yet, every option trader - market-maker and public alike - is forced to make a 
"guess" about volatility when he buys or sells an option. That is true because the price 
he pays is heavily influenced by his volatility estimate ( whether or not he realizes that 
he is, in fact, making such a volatility estimate). As you might imagine, most traders 
have no idea what volatility is going to be during the life of the option. They just pay 
prices that seem to make sense, perhaps based on historic volatility. Consequently, 
today's implied volatility may bear no resemblance to the actual statistical volatility 
that later unfolds during the life of the option. 
For those who desire a more mathematical definition of implied volatility, con­
sider this. 
===== PDF page index 785 =====
734 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatillty 
Opt price = f(Stock price, Strike price, Time, Risk-free rate, Volatility, Dividends) 
Furthermore, suppose that one knows the following information: 
XYZ price: 52 
April 50 call price: 6 
Time remaining to April expiration: 36 days 
Dividends: $0.00 
Risk-free interest rate: 5% 
This information, which is available for every option at any time, simply from an 
option quote, gives us everything except the implied volatility. So what volatility 
would one have to plug in the Black-Scholes model ( or whatever model one is using) 
to make the model give the answer 6 (the current price of the option)? That is, what 
volatility is necessary to solve the equation? 
6 = f(52, 50, 36 days, 5%, Volatility, $0.00) 
Whatever volatility is necessary to make the model yield the current market price (6) 
as its value, is the implied volatility for the XYZ April 50 call. In this case, if you're 
interested, the implied volatility is 75.4%. The actual process of determining implied 
volatility is an iterative one. There is no formula, per se. Rather, one keeps trying var­
ious volatility estimates in the model until the answer is close enough to the market 
value. 
THE VOLATILITY OF VOLATILITY 
In order to discuss the implied volatility of a particular entity - stock, index, or 
futures contract one generally refers to the implied volatility of individual options 
or perhaps the composite implied volatility of the entire option series. This is gener­
ally good enough for strategic comparisons. However, it turns out that there might be 
other ways to consider looking at implied volatility. In paiticular, one might want to 
consider how wide the range of implied volatility is - that is, how volatile the indi­
vidual implied volatility numbers are. 
It is often conventional to talk about the percentile of implied volatility. That is 
a way to rank the current implied volatility reading with past readings for the same 
underlying instrument. 
However, a fairly important ingredient is missing when percentiles are involved. 
One can't really tell if "cheap" options are cheap as a practical matter. That's because 
one doesn't know how tightly packed together the past implied volatility readings are. 
For example, if one were to discover that the entire past range of implied volatility 
for XYZ stretched only from 39% to 45%, then a current reading of 40%, while low, 
===== PDF page index 786 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 135 
might not seem all that attractive. That is, if the first percentile of XYZ options were 
at an implied volatility reading of 39% and the 100th percentile were at 45%, then a 
reading of 40% is really quite mundane. There just wouldn't be much room for 
implied volatility to increase on an absolute basis. Even if it rose to the 100th per­
centile, an individual XYZ option wouldn't gain much value, because its implied 
volatility would only be increasing from about 40% to 45%. 
However, if the distribution of past implied volatility is wide, then one can truly 
say the options are cheap if they are currently in a low percentile. Suppose, rather 
than the tight range described above, that the range of past implied volatilities for 
XYZ instead stretched from 35% to 90% - that the first percentile for XYZ implied 
volatility was at 35% and the 100th percentile was at 90%. Now, if the current read­
ing is 40%, there is a large range above the current reading into which the options 
could trade, thereby potentially increasing the value of the options if implied volatil­
ity moved up to the higher percentiles. 
What this means, as a practical matter, is that one not only needs to know the 
current percentile of implied volatility, but he also needs to know the range of num­
bers over which that percentile was derived. If the range is wide, then an extreme 
percentile truly represents a cheap or expensive option. But if the range is tight, then 
one should probably not be overly concerned with the current percentile of implied 
volatility. 
Another facet of implied volatility that is often overlooked is how it ranges with 
respect to the time left in the option. This is particularly important for traders of 
LEAPS (long-term) options, for the range of implied volatility of a LEAPS option will 
not be as great as that of a short-term option. In order to demonstrate this, the 
implied volatilities of $OEX options, both regular and LEAPS, were charted over 
several years. The resulting scatter diagram is shown in Figure 36-3. 
Two curved lines are drawn on Figure 36-3. They contain most of the data 
points. One can see from these lines that the range of implied volatility for near-term 
options is greater than it is for longer-term options. For example, the implied volatil­
ity readings on the far left of the scatter diagram range from about 14% to nearly 40% 
(ignore the one outlying point). However, for longer-term options of 24 months or 
more, the range is about 17% to 32%. While $0EX options have their own idiosyn­
cracies, this scatter diagram is fairly typical of what we would see for any stock or 
index option. 
One conclusion that we can draw from this is that LEAPS option implied 
volatilities just don't change nearly as much as those of short-term options. That can 
be an important piece of information for a LEAPS option trader especially if he is 
comparing the LEAPS implied volatility with a composite implied volatility or with 
the historical volatility of the underlying. 
===== PDF page index 787 =====
736 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Once again, consider Figure 36-3. While it is difficult to discern from the graph 
alone, the 10th percentile of $OEX composite implied volatility, using all of the data 
points given, is 17%. The line that marks this level (the tenth percentile) is noted on 
the right side of the scatter diagram. It is quite easy to see that the LEAPS options 
rarely trade at that low volatility level. 
In Figure 36-3, the distance between the curved lines is much greater on the 
left side (i.e., for shorter-term options) than it is on the right side (for longer-term 
options). Thus, it's difficult for the longer-term options to register either an extreme­
ly high or extremely low implied volatility reading, when all of the options are con­
sidered. Consequently, LEAPS options will rarely appear "cheap" when one looks at 
their percentile of implied volatility, including all the short-term options, too: 
One might say that, if he were going to buy long-term options, he should look 
only at the size of the volatility range on the right side of the scatter diagram. Then, 
he could make his decision about whether the options are cheap or not by only com­
paring the current reading to past readings of long-term options. This line of think­
ing, though, is somewhat fallacious reasoning, for a couple of reasons: First, if one 
holds the option for any long period of time, the volatility range will widen out and 
there is a chance that implied volatility could drop substantially. Second, the long­
term volatility range might be so small that, even though the options are initially 
cheap, quick increase in implied volatility over several deciles might not translate into 
much of a gain in price in the short term. 
FIGURE 36-3. Implied volatilities of $OEX options over several 
years. 
50 
45 
40 
~ 35 
~ 30 
g 25 "O 
.91 20 C. 
E 15 -0th 
10 
5 
0 
0 10 20 30 40 
Time to Expiration (months) 
===== PDF page index 788 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics ol Volatility Trading 737 
It's important for anyone using implied volatility in his trading decisions to 
understand that the range of past implied volatilities is important, and to realize that 
the volatility range expands as time shrinks. 
IS IMPLIED VOLATILITY A GOOD PREDICTOR OF ACTUAL VOLATILITY? 
The fact that one can calculate implied volatility does not mean that the calculation 
is a good estimate of forthcoming volatility. As stated above, the marketplace does not 
really know how volatile an instrument is going to be, any more than it knows the 
forthcoming price of the stock. There are clues, of course, and some general ways of 
estimating forthcoming volatility, but the fact remains that sometimes options trade 
with an implied volatility that is quite a bit out of line with past levels. Therefore, 
implied volatility may be considered to be an inaccurate estimate of what is really 
going to happen to the stock during the life of the option. Just remember that implied 
volatility is a forward-looking estimate, and since it is based on traders' suppositions, 
it can be wrong - just as any estimate of future events can be in error. 
The question posed above is one that should probably be asked more often than 
it is: "Is implied volatility a good predictor of actual volatility?" Somehow, it seems 
logical to assume that implied and historical (actual) volatility will converge. That's 
not really true, at least not in the short term. Moreover, even if they do converge, 
which one was right to begin with - implied or historical? That is, did implied volatil­
ity move to get more in line with actual movements of the underlying, or did the 
stock's movement speed up or slow down to get in line with implied volatility? 
To illustrate this concept, a few charts will be used that show the comparison 
between implied and historical volatility. Figure 36-4 shows information for the 
$0EX Index. In general, $0EX options are overpriced. See the discussion in 
Chapter 29. That is, implied volatility of $0EX options is almost always higher than 
what actual volatility turns out to be. Consider Figure 36-4. There are three lines in 
the figure: (a) implied volatility, (b) actual volatility, and (c) the difference between 
the two. There is an important distinction here, though, as to what comprises these 
curves: 
(a) The implied volatility curve depicts the 20-day moving average of daily compos­
ite implied volatility readings for $0EX. That is, each day one number is com­
puted as a composite implied volatility for $0EX for that day. These implied 
volatility figures are computed using the averaging formula shown in the chapter 
on mathematical applications, whereby each option's implied volatility is weight­
ed by trading volume and by distance in- or out-of-the-money, to arrive at a sin­
gle composite implied volatility reading for the trading day. To smooth out those 
daily readings, a 20-day simple moving average is used. This daily implied volatil-
===== PDF page index 789 =====
738 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 36-4. 
$OEX implied versus historical volatility. 
10 
Implied minus Actual 1999 Date 
ity of $OEX options encompasses all the $OEX options, so it is different from the 
Volatility Index ($VIX), which uses only the options closest to the money. By 
using all of the options, a slightly different volatility figure is arrived at, as com­
pared to $VIX, but a chart of the two would show similar patterns. That is, peaks 
in implied volatility computed using all of the $OEX options occur at the same 
points in time as peaks in $VIX. 
(b) The actual volatility on the graph is a little different from what one normally 
thinks of as historical volatility. It is the 20-day historical volatility, computed 20 
days later than the date of the implied volatility calculation. Hence, points on the 
implied volatility curve are matched with a 20-day historical volatility calculation 
that was made 20 days later. Thus, the two curves more or less show the predic­
tion of volatility and what actually happened over the 20-day period. These actu­
al volatility readings are smoothed as well, with a 20-day moving average. 
(c) The difference between the two is quite simple, and is shown as the bottom 
curve on the graph. A "zero" line is drawn through the difference. 
When this "difference line" passes through the zero line, the projection of 
volatility and what actually occurred 20 days later were equal. If the difference line 
is above the zero line, then implied volatility was too high; the options were over­
priced. Conversely, if the difference line is below the zero line, then actual volatility 
turned out to be greater than implied volatility had anticipated. The options were 
underpriced in that case. Those latter areas are shaded in Figure 36-4. Simplistically, 
you would want to own options during the shaded periods on the chart, and would 
want to be a seller of options during the non-shaded areas. 
===== PDF page index 790 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 739 
Note that Figure 36-4 indeed confirms the fact that $OEX options are consis­
tently overpriced. Very few charts are as one-dimensional as the $OEX chart, where 
the options were so consistently overpriced. Most stocks find the difference line 
oscillating back and forth about the zero mark. Consider Figures 36-5 and 36-6. 
Figure 36-5 shows a chart similar to Figure 36-4, comparing actual and implied 
volatility, and their difference, for a particular stock. Figure 36-6 shows the price 
graph of that same stock, overlaid on implied volatility, during the period up to and 
including the heavy shading. 
The volatility comparison chart (Figure 36-5) shows several shaded areas, dur­
ing which the stock was more volatile than the options had predicted. Owners of 
options profited during these times, provided they had a more or less neutral outlook 
on the stock. Figure 36-6 shows the stock's performance up to and including the 
March-April 1999 period - the largest shaded area on the chart. Note that implied 
volatility was quite low before the stock made the strong move from 10 to 30 in little 
more than a month. These graphs are taken from actual data and demonstrate just 
how badly out of line implied volatility can be. In February and early March 1999, 
implied volatility was at or near the lowest levels on these charts. Yet, by the end of 
March, a major price explosion had begun in the stock, one that tripled its value in 
just over a month. Clearly, implied volatility was a poor predictor of forthcoming 
actual volatility in this case. 
What about later in the year? In Figure 36-5, one can observe that implied and 
actual volatility oscillated back and forth quite a few times during the rest of 1999. It 
might appear that these oscillations are small and that implied volatility was actually 
doing a pretty good job of predicting actual volatility, at least until the final spike in 
December 1999. However, looking at the scale on the left-hand side of Figure 36-5, 
one can see that implied volatility was trying to remain in the 50% to 60% range, but 
actual volatility kept bolting higher rather frequently. 
One more example will be presented. Figures 36-7 and 36-8 depict another 
stock and its volatilities. On the left half of each graph, implied volatility was quite 
high. It was higher than actual volatility turned out to be, so the difference line in 
Figure 36-7 remains above the zero line for several months. Then, for some reason, 
the option market decided to make an adjustment, and implied volatility began to 
drop. Its lowest daily point is marked with a circle in Figure 36-8, and the same point 
in time is marked with a similar circle in Figure 36-7. At that time, options traders 
were "saying" that they expected the stock to be very tame over the ensuing weeks. 
Instead, the stock made two quick moves, one from 15 down to 11, and then anoth­
er back up to 17. That movement jerked actual volatility higher, but implied volatili­
ty remained rather low. After a period of trading between 13 and 15, during which 
time implied volatility remained low, the stock finally exploded to the upside, as evi­
denced by the spikes on the right-hand side of both Figures 36-7 and 36-8. Thus, 
===== PDF page index 791 =====
740 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 36-5. 
Implied versus historical volatility of a stock. 
150 
140 
130 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
oi--""""'""""',,,.....""' -10 
-20 
-30 "O 
-40 ct! 
-50 ~ 
-80 0. 
-701'-'-=CIJ+---+---+--+; 
-80 
1999 
FIGURE 36-6. 
Implied minus Actual 
The price graph of the stock. 
. . . 
•• , •••••••• ,. •••••••• .,. ••• + ••••••••••• ••••• -~······ •••••• ,. ••••••••••• ·t . ······ . . . ... [" 
·· · ·· ·· ··· ·· · · · Stock Price · ·· · : ·· ·· I 
~ !'"Y"d"'il~tilirrs::•of'T! 
' ' .· ............ ; ·--·•·····! ............ · ................ : ............... : ...........•.. :. 
············•·:••············•:•···········•;••·············(·········•: Implied Volatility 
98 0 N D J F M A M 99 
29.000 
27.000 
25.000 
23.000 
21.000 
19.000 
17.000 
15.000 
13.000 
11.000 
9.000 
7.000 
5.000 
Date 
===== PDF page index 792 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 
FIGURE 36-7. 
Implied versus historical volatility of a stock. 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
01-----------~~r:cr:1---
-10 "O 
-20 ~ 
-30"5" F M A M J J A S O N D-
Implied minus Actual 1999 
FIGURE 36-8. 
The price graph of the stock • 
... : ....... --: ......... : ·······.··········, ····-·-:· ....... : ........ ..; ... . 
······: ---:·······•: J. ...... 1 ....... ) ....... --) .... ----1 .).. ! .). 
······-·········-··· -.. ;..... : ...... ;.. . : ......... : .... . 
...... .: ......... : .......... : .......... : ....... , ......... •. 
..... ; ...... ) ....... .L.. ... .L .. Stock· Pri~e ..... ) ...... ) .. . 
·······'• ...... _.: ____ .... •. ·······:----
.•.•••• j ' . 
J F M A M J J A S 0 N D J 
1999 
Date 
27.000 
25.000 
23.000 
21.000 
19.000 
17.000 
15.000 
13.000 
11.000 
9.000 
7.000 
5.000 
741 
===== PDF page index 793 =====
742 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
implied volatility was a poor predictor of actual volatility for most of the time on these 
graphs. Moreover, implied volatility remained low at the right-hand side of the charts 
(January 2000) even though the stock doubled in the course of a month. 
The important thing to note from these figures is that they clearly show that 
implied volatility is really not a very good predictor of the actual volatility that is to 
follow. If it were, the difference line would hover near zero most of the time. Instead, 
it swings back and forth wildly, with implied volatility over- or underestimating actu­
al volatility by quite wide levels. Thus, the current estimates of volatility by traders 
(i.e., implied volatility) can actually be quite wrong. 
Conversely, one could also say that historical volatility is not a great predictor of 
volatility that is to follow, either, especially in the short term. No one really makes any 
claims that it is a good predictor, for historical volatility is merely a reflection of what 
has happened in the past. All we can say for sure is that implied and historical volatil­
ity tend to trade within a range. 
One thing that does stand out on these charts is that implied volatility seems to 
fluctuate less than actual volatility. That seems to be a natural function of the volatil­
ity predictive process. For example, when the market collapses, implied volatilities of 
options rise only modestly. This can be observed by again referring to Figure 36-4, 
the $0EX option example. The only shaded area on the graph occurred when the 
market had a rather sharp sell-off during October 1999. In previous years, when 
there had been even more severe market declines (October 1997 or August-October 
1998) $0EX actual volatility had briefly moved above implied volatility (this data for 
1997 and 1998 is shown in Figure 36-9). In other words, option traders and market­
makers are predicting volatility when they price options, and one tends to make a 
FIGURE 36-9. 
$OEX implied versus historical volatility, 1997-1998. 
Actual 
40 
30 
10 
0 
D J F M A 
-20 1997 1998 
===== PDF page index 794 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 743 
prediction that is somewhat "middle of the road," since an extreme prediction is 
more likely to be wrong. Of course, it turns out to be wrong anyway, since actual 
volatility jumps around quite rapidly. 
The few charts that have been presented here don't constitute a rigorous study 
upon which to draw the conclusion that implied volatility is a poor predictor of actu­
al volatility, but it is this author's firm opinion that that statement is true. A graduate 
student looking for a master's thesis topic could take it from here. 
VOLATILITY TRADING 
As a result of the fact that implied volatility can sometimes be at irrational extremes, 
options may sometimes trade with implied volatilities that are significantly out of line 
with what one would normally expect. For example, suppose a stock is in a relatively 
nonvolatile period, like the price of the stock in Figure 36-2, just before point A on 
the graph. During that time, option sellers would probably become more aggressive 
while option buyers, who probably have been seeing their previous purchases decay­
ing with time, become more timid. As a result, option prices drop. Alternatively stat­
ed, implied volatility drops. When implied volatilities are decreasing, option sellers 
are generally happy (and may often become more aggressive), while option buyers 
are losing money (and may often tend to become more timid). This is just a function 
of looking at the profit and loss statements in one's option account. But anyone who 
took a longer backward look at the volatility of the stock in Figure 36-2 would see that 
it had been much more volatile in the past. Consequently, he might decide that the 
implied volatility of the options had gotten too low and he would be a buyer of 
options. 
It is the volatility trader's objective to spot situations when implied volatility is 
possibly or probably erroneous and to take a position that would profit when the 
error is brought to light. Thus, the volatility trader's main objective is spotting situa­
tions when implied volatility is overvalued or undervalued, irrespective of his outlook 
for the underlying stock itself. In some ways, this is not so different from the funda­
mental stock analyst who is attempting to spot overvalued or undervalued stocks, 
based on earnings and other fundamentals. 
From another viewpoint, volatility trading is also a contrarian theory of invest­
ing. That is, when everyone else thinks the underlying is going to be nonvolatile, the 
volatility trader buys volatility. When everyone else is selling options and option buy­
ers are hard to find, the volatility trader steps up to buy options. Of course, some rig­
orous analysis must be done before the volatility trader can establish new positions, 
but when those situations come to light, it is most likely that he is taking positions 
opposite to what "the masses" are doing. He will be buying volatility when the major-
===== PDF page index 795 =====
744 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
ity has been selling it (or at least, when the majority is refusing to buy it), and he will 
be selling volatility when everyone else is panicking to buy options, making them 
quite expensive. 
WHY DOES VOLATILITY REACH EXTREMES? 
One can't just buy every option that he considers to be cheap. There must be some 
consideration given to what the probabilities of stock movement are. Even more 
important, one can't just sell every option that he values as expensive. There may be 
valid reasons why options become expensive, not the least of which is that someone 
may have inside information about some forthcoming corporate news (a takeover or 
an earnings surprise, for example). 
Since options off er a good deal of leverage, they are an attractive vehicle to any­
one who wants to make a quick trade, especially if that person believes he knows 
something that the general public doesn't know. Thus, if there is a leak of a takeover 
rumor - whether it be from corporate officers, investment bankers, printers, or 
accountants - whoever possesses that information may quite likely buy options 
aggressively, or at least bid for them. Whenever demand for an option outstrips sup­
ply - in this case, the major supplier is probably the market-maker - the options 
quickly get more expensive. That is, implied volatility increases. 
In fact, there are financial analysts and reporters who look for large increases in 
trading volume as a clue to which stocks might be ready to make a big move. 
Invariably, if the trading volume has increased and if implied volatility has increased 
as well, it is a good warning sign that someone with inside information is buying the 
options. In such a case, it might not be a good idea to sell volatility, even though the 
options are mathematically expensive. 
Sometimes, even more minor news items are known in advance by a small seg­
ment of the investing community. If those items will be enough to move the stock 
even a couple of points, those who possess the information may try to buy options in 
advance of the news. Such minor news items might include the resignation or firing 
of a high-ranking corporate officer, or perhaps some strategic alliance with another 
company, or even a new product announcement. 
The seller of volatility can watch for two things as warning signs that perhaps 
the options are "predicting" a corporate event (and hence should be avoided as a 
"volatility sale"). Those two things are a dramatic increase in option volume or a sud­
den jump in implied volatility of the options. One or both can be caused by traders 
with inside information trying to obtain a leveraged instrument in advance of the 
actual corporate news item being made public. 
===== PDF page index 796 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 745 
A SUDDEN INCREASE IN OPTION VOLUME OR IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
The symptoms of insider trading, as evidenced by a large increase in option trading 
activity, can be recognized. Typically, the majority of the increased volume occurs in 
the near-term option series, particularly the at-the-money strike and perhaps the next 
strike out-of-the-money. The activity doesn't cease there, however. It propagates out 
to other option series as market-makers (who by the nature of their job function are 
short the near-term options that those with insider knowledge are buying) snap up 
everything on the books that they can find. In addition, the market-makers may try 
to entice others, perhaps institutions, to sell some expensive calls against a portion of 
their institutional stock holdings. Activity of this sort should be a warning sign to the 
volatility seller to stand aside in this situation. 
Of course, on any given day there are many stocks whose options are extraordi­
narily active, but the increase in activity doesn't have anything to do with insider trad­
ing. This might include a large covered call write or maybe a large put purchase 
established by an institution as a hedge against an existing stock position, or a rela­
tively large conversion or reversal arbitrage established by an arbitrageur, or even a 
large spread transaction initiated by a hedge fund. In any of these cases, option vol­
ume would jump dramatically, but it wouldn't mean that anyone had inside knowl­
edge about a forthcoming corporate event. Rather, the increases in option trading 
volume as described in this paragraph are merely functions of the normal workings 
of the marketplace. 
What distinguishes these arbitrage and hedging activities from the machina­
tions of insider trading is: (1) There is little propagation of option volume into other 
series in the "benign" case, and (2) the stock price itself may languish. However, 
when true insider activity is present, the market-makers react to the aggressive 
nature of the call buying. These market-makers know they need to hedge themselves, 
because they do not want to be short naked call options in case a takeover bid or 
some other news spurs the stock dramatically higher. As mentioned earlier, they try 
to buy up any other options offered in "the book," but there may not be many of 
those. So, as a last result, the way they reduce their negative position delta is to buy 
stock. Thus, if the options are active and expensive, and if the stock is rising too, you 
probably have a reasonably good indication that "someone knows something." 
However, if the options are expensive but none of the other factors are present, espe­
cially if the stock is declining in price - then one might feel more comfortable with a 
strategy of selling volatility in this case. 
However, there is a case in which options might be the object of pursuit by 
someone with insider knowledge, yet not be accompanied by heavy trading volume. 
This situation could occur with illiquid options. In this case, a floor broker holding 
===== PDF page index 797 =====
746 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
the order of those with insider information might come into the pit to buy options, 
but the market-makers may not sell them many, preferring to raise their offering 
price rather than sell a large quantity. If this happens a few times in a row, the options 
will have gotten very expensive as the floor broker raises his bid price repeatedly, but 
only buys a few contracts each time. Meanwhile, the market-maker keeps raising his 
offering price. 
Eventually, the floor broker concludes that the options are too expensive to 
bother with and walks away. Perhaps his client then buys stock. In any case, what has 
happened is that the options have gotten very expensive as the bids and offers were 
repeatedly raised, but not much option volume was actually traded because of the 
illiquidity of the contracts. Hence the normal warning light associated with a sudden 
increase in option volume would not be present. In this case, though, a volatility sell­
er should still be careful, because he does not want to step in to sell calls right before 
some major corporate news item is released. The clue here is that implied volatility 
literally exploded in a short period of time (one day, or actually less time), and that 
alone should be enough warning to a volatility seller. 
The point that should be taken here is that when options suddenly become very 
expensive, especially if accompanied by strong stock price movement and strong 
stock volume, there may very well be a good reason why that is happening. That rea­
son will probably become public knowledge shortly in the form of a news event. In 
fact, a major market-maker once said he believed that rrwst increases in implied 
volatility were eventually justified - that is, some corporate news item was released 
that made the stock jump. Hence, a volatility seller should avoid situations such as 
these. Any sudden increase in implied volatility should probably be viewed as a 
potential news story in the making. These situations are not what a neutral volatility 
seller wants to get into. 
On the other hand, if options have become expensive as a result of corporate 
news, then the volatility seller can feel more comfortable making a trade. Perhaps the 
company has announced poor earnings and the stock has taken a beating while 
implied volatility rose. In this situation, one can assess the information and analyze it 
clearly; he is not dealing with some hidden facts known to only a few insider traders. 
With clear analysis, one might be able to develop a volatility selling strategy that is 
prudent and potentially profitable. 
Another situation in which options become expensive in the wake of market 
action is during a bear market in the underlying. This can be true for indices, stocks, 
and futures contracts. The Crash of '87 is an extreme example, but implied volatility 
shot through the roof during the crash. Other similar sharp market collapses - such 
as October 1989, October 1997, and August-September 1998 - caused implied 
volatility to jump dramatically. In these situations, the volatility seller knows why 
===== PDF page index 798 =====
Chapter 31,: 1be Basics of Volatility Trading 747 
implied volatility is high. Given that fact, he can then construct positions around a 
neutral strategy or around his view of the future. The time when the volatility seller 
must be careful is when the options are expensive and no one seems to know why. 
That's when insider trading may be present, and that's when the volatility seller 
should defer from selling options. 
CHEAP OPTIONS 
When options are cheap, there are usually far less discernible reasons why they have 
become cheap. An obvious one may be that the corporate structure of the company 
has changed; perhaps it is being taken over, or perhaps the company· has acquired 
another company nearly its size. In either case, it is possible that the combined enti­
ty's stock will be less volatile than the original company's stock was. As the takeover 
is in the process of being consummated, the implied volatility of the company's 
options will drop, giving the false impression that they are cheap. 
In a similar vein, a company may mature, perhaps issuing more shares of stock, 
or perhaps building such a.., good earnings stream that the stock is considered less 
volatile than it formerly was. Some of the Internet companies will be classic cases: In 
the beginning they were high-flying stocks with plenty of price movement, so the 
options traded with a relatively high degree of implied volatility. However, as the com­
pany matures, it buys other Internet companies and then perhaps even merges with a 
large, established company (America Online and Time-Warner Communications, for 
example). In these cases, actual (statistical) volatility will diminish as the company 
matures, and implied volatility will do the same. On the surface, a buyer of volatility 
may see the reduced volatility as an attractive buying situation, but upon further 
inspection he may find that it is justified. If the decrease in implied volatility seems 
justified, a buyer of volatility should ignore it and look for other opportunities. 
All volatility traders should be suspicious when volatility seems to be extreme -
either too expensive or too cheap. The trader should investigate the possibilities as to 
why volatility is trading at such extreme levels. In some cases, the supply and demand 
of the public just pushes the options to extreme levels; there is nothing more involved 
than that. Those are the best volatility trading situations. However, if there is a hint 
that the volatility has gotten to an extreme reading because of some logical (but per­
haps nonpublic) reason, then the volatility trader should be suspicious and should 
probably avoid the trade. Typically this happens with expensive options. 
Buyers of volatility really have little to fear if they miscalculate and thus buy an 
option that appears inexpensive but turns out not to be, in reality. The volatility buyer 
might lose money if he does this, and overpaying for options constantly will lead to 
ruin, but an occasional mistake will probably not be fatal. 
===== PDF page index 799 =====
748 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Sellers of volatility, however, have to be a lot more careful. One mistake could 
be the last one. Selling naked calls that seem terrifically expensive by historic stan­
dards could be ruinous if a takeover bid subsequently emerges at a large premium to 
the stock's current price. Even put sellers must be careful, although a lot of traders 
think that selling naked puts is safe because it's the same as buying stock. But who 
ever said buying stock wasn't risky? If the stock literally collapses - falling from 80, 
say, to 15 or 20, as Oxford Health did, or from 30 to 2 as Sunrise Technology did -
then a put seller will be buried. Since the risk of loss from naked option selling is 
large, one could be wiped out by a huge gap opening. That's why it's imperative to 
study why the options are expensive before one sells them. If it's known, for exam­
ple, that a small biotech company is awaiting FDA trial results in two weeks,~and all 
the options suddenly become expensive, the volatility seller should not attempt to be 
a hero. It's obvious that at least some traders believe that there is a chance for the 
stock to gap in price dramatically. It would be better to find some other situation in 
which to sell options. 
The seller of futures options or index options should be cautious too, although 
there can't be takeovers in those markets, nor can there be a huge earnings surprise 
or other corporate event that causes a big gap. The futures markets, though do have 
things like crop reports and government economic data to deal with, and those can 
create volatile situations, too. The bottom line is that volatility selling - even hedged 
volatility selling - can be taxing and aggravating if one has sold volatility in front of 
what turns out to be a news item that justifies the expensive volatility. 
SUMMARY 
Volatility trading is a predictable way to approach the market, because volatility 
almost invariably trades in a range and therefore its value can be estimated with a 
great deal more precision than can the actual prices of the underlyings. Even so, one 
must be careful in his approach to volatility trading, because diligent research is 
needed to determine if, in fact, volatility is "cheap" or "expensive." As with any sys­
tematic approach to the market, if one is sloppy about his research, he cannot expect 
to achieve superior results. In the next few chapters, a good deal of time will be spent 
to give the reader a good understanding of how volatility affects positions and how it 
can be used to construct trades with positive expected rates of return. 
===== PDF page index 800 =====
· GHAR:f ER :8'7 . . -
How Volatility Affects 
Popular Strategies 
The previous chapter addressed the calculation or interpretation of implied volatili­
ty, and how to relate it to historic volatility. Another, related topic that is important is 
how implied volatility affects a specific option strategy. Simplistically, one might think 
that the effect of a change in implied volatility on an option position would be a sim­
ple matter to discern; but in reality, most traders don't have a complete grasp of the 
ways that volatility affects option positions. In some cases, especially option spreads 
or more complex positions, one may not have an intuitive "picture" of how his posi­
tion is going to be affected by a change in implied volatility. In this chapter, we'll 
attempt a relatively thorough review of how implied volatility changes affect most of 
the popular option strategies. 
There are ways to use computer analysis to "draw" a picture of this volatiiity 
effect, of course, and that will be discussed momentarily. But an option strategist 
should have some idea of the general changes that a position will undergo if implied 
volatility changes. Before getting into the individual strategies, it is important that 
one understands some of the basics of the effect of volatility on an option's price. 
VEGA 
Technically speaking, the term that one uses to quantify the impact of volatility 
changes on the price of an option is called the vega of the option. In this chapter, the 
references will be to vega, but the emphasis here is on practicality, so the descriptions 
749 