
===== PDF page index 248 =====
Chapter 12: Combining Calendar and Ratio Spreads 223 
term calls while buyingfewer of the intermediate-term or long-term calls. Since more 
calls are being sold than are being bought, naked options are involved. It is often pos­
sible to set up a ratio calendar spread for a credit, meaning that if the underlying 
stock never rallies above the strike, the strategist will still make money. However, 
since naked calls are involved, the collateral requirements for participating in this 
strategy may be large. 
Example: As in the bullish calendar spreads described in Chapter 9, the prices are: 
XYZ common, 45; 
XYZ April 50 call, l; and 
XYZ July 50 call, l½. 
In the bullish calendar spread strategy, one July 50 is bought for each April 50 sold. 
This means that the spread is established for a debit of½ point and that the invest­
ment is $50 per spread, plus commissions. The strategist using the ratio calendar 
/ spread has essentially the same philosophy as the bullish calendar spreader: The 
stock will remain below 50 until April expiration and may then rally. The ratio calen­
dar spread might be set up as follows: 
Buy 1 XYZ July 50 call at l½ 
Sell 2 XYZ April 50 calls at 1 each 
Net 
l½ debit 
2 credit 
½ credit 
Although there is no cash involved in setting up the ratio spread since it is done for 
a credit, there is a collateral requirement for the naked April 50 call. 
If the stock remains below 50 until April expiration, the long call - the July 50 
- will be owned free. After that, no matter what happens to the underlying stock, the 
spread cannot lose money. In fact, if the underlying stock advances dramatically after 
near-term expiration, large profits will accrue as the July 50 call increases in value. Of 
course, this is entirely dependent on the near-term call expiring worthless. If the 
underlying stock should rally above 50 before the April calls expire, the ratio calen­
dar spread is in danger of losing a large amount of money because of the naked calls, 
and defensive action must be taken. Follow-up actions are described later. 
The collateral required for the ratio calendar spread is equal to the amount of 
collateral required for the naked calls less the credit taken in for the spread. Since 
naked calls will be marked to market as the stock moves up, it is always best to allow 
enough collateral to get to a defensive action point. In the example above, suppose 
that one felt he would definitely be taking defensive action if the stock rallied to 53 
===== PDF page index 249 =====
224 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
before April expiration. He should then figure his collateral requirement as if the 
stock were at 53, regardless of what the collateral requirement is at the current time. 
This is a prudent tactic whenever naked options are involved, since the strategist will 
never be forced into an unwanted close-out before his defensive action point is 
reached. The collateral required for this example would then be as follows, assuming 
the call is trading at 3½: 
20% of 53 
Call premium 
Less initial credit 
Total collateral to set aside 
$1,060 
+ 350 
-___fill 
$1,360 
The strategist is not really "investing" anything in this strategy, because his require­
ment is in the form of collateral, not cash. That is, his current portfolio assets need 
not be disturbed to set up this spread, although losses would, of course, create deb­
its in the account. Many naked option strategies are similar in this respect, and the 
strategist may earn additional money from the collateral value of his portfolio with­
out disturbing the portfolio itself. However, he should take care to operate such 
strategies in a conservative manner, since any income earned is "free," but losses may 
force him to disturb his portfolio. In light of this fact, it is always difficult to compute 
returns on investment in a strategy that requires only collateral to operate. One can, 
of course, compute the return on the maximum collateral required during the life of 
the position. The large investor participating in such a strategy should be satisfied 
with any sort of positive return. 
Returning to the example above, the strategist would make his $50 credit, less 
commissions, if the underlying stock remained below 50 until July expiration. It is not 
possible to determine the results to the upside so definitively. If the April 50 calls 
expire worthless and then the stock rallies, the potential profits are limited only by 
time. The case in which the stock rallies before April expiration is of the most con­
cern. If the stock rallies immediately, the spread will undoubtedly show a loss. If the 
stock rallies to 50 more slowly, but still before April expiration, it is possible that the 
spread will not have changed much. Using the same example, suppose that XYZ ral­
lies to 50 with only a few weeks of life remaining in the April 50 calls. Then the April 
50 calls might be selling at l ½ while the July 50 call might be selling at 3. The ratio 
spread could be closed for even money at that point; the cost of buying back the 2 
April 50's would equal the credit received from selling the one July 50. He would thus 
make½ point, less commissions, on the entire spread transaction. Finally, at the expi­
ration date of the April 50 calls, one can estimate where he would break even. 
Suppose one estimated that the July 50 call would be selling for 5½ points if XYZ 
were at 53 at April expiration. Since the April 50 calls would be selling for 3 at that 
===== PDF page index 250 =====
Chapter 12: Combining Calendar and Ratio Spreads 225 
time (they would be at parity), there would be a debit of½ point to close the ratio 
spread. The two April 50 calls would be bought for 6 points and the July 50 call sold 
for 5½ - a ½ debit. The entire spread transaction would thus have broken even, less 
commissions, at 53 at April expiration, since the spread was put on for a ½ credit and 
was taken off for a ½ debit. The risk to the upside depends clearly, then, on how 
quickly the stock rallies above 50 before April expiration. 
CHOOSING THE SPREAD 
Some of the same criteria used in setting up a bullish calendar spread apply here as 
well. Select a stock that is volatile enough to move above the striking price in the 
allotted time - after the near-term expires, but before the long call expires. Do not 
use calls that are so far out-of-the-money that it would be virtually impossible for the 
stock to reach the striking price. Always set up the spread for a credit, commissions 
included. This will assure that a profit will be made even if the stock goes nowhere. 
However, if the credit has to be generated by using an extremely large ratio - greater 
than 3 short calls to every long one - one should probably reject that choice, since 
the potential losses in an immediate rally would be large. 
The upside break-even point prior to April expiration should be determined 
using a pricing model. Such a model, or the output from one, can generally be 
obtained from a data service or from some brokerage firms. It is useful to the strate­
gist to know exactly how much room he has to the upside if the stock begins to rally. 
This will allow him to take defensive action in the form of closing out the spread 
before his break-even point is reached. Since a pricing model can estimate a call 
price for any length of time, the strategist can compute his break-even points at 
April expiration, 1 month before April expiration, 6 weeks before, and so on. When 
the long option in a spread expires at a different time from the short option, the 
break-even point is dynamic. That is, it changes with time. Table 12-1 shows how 
this information might be accumulated for the example spread used above. Since 
this example spread was established for a ½-point credit with the stock at 45, the 
break-even points would be at stock prices where the spread could be removed for 
a ½-point debit. Suppose the spread was initiated with 95 days remaining until April 
expiration. In each line of the table, the cost for buying 2 April 50's is ½ point more 
than the price of the July 50. That is, there would be a ½-point debit involved in 
closing the spread at those prices. Notice that the break-even price increases as time 
passes. Initially, the spread would show a loss if the stock moved up at all. This is to 
be expected, since an immediate move would not allow for any erosion in the time 
value premium of the near-term calls. As more and more time passes, time weighs 
===== PDF page index 251 =====
226 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
more heavily on the near-term April calls than on the longer-term July call. Once the 
strategist has this information, he might then look at a chart of the underlying stock. 
If there is resistance for XYZ below 53, his eventual break-even point at April expi­
ration, he could then feel more confident about this spread. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
The main purpose of defensive action in this strategy is to limit losses if the stock 
should rally before April e:xJ)iration. The strategist should be quick to close out the 
spread before any serious losses accrue. The long call quite adequately compen­
sates for the losses on the short calls up to a certain point, a fact demonstrated in 
Table 12-1. However, the stock cannot be allowed to run. A rule of thumb that is 
often useful is to close the spread if the stock breaks out above technical resistance 
or if it breaks above the eventual break-even point at expiration. In the example 
above, the strategist would close the spread if, at any time, XYZ rose above 53 
(before April expiration, of course). 
If a significant amount of time has passed, the strategist might act even more 
quickly in closing the spread. As was shown earlier, if the stock rallies to 50 with only 
a few weeks of time remaining, the spread may actually be at a slight profit at that 
time. It is often the best course of action to take the small profit, if the stock rises 
above the striking price. 
TABLE 12-1. 
Break-even points changing over time. 
Estimated Estimated 
Days Remaining until Break-Even Point April 50 July 50 
April Expiration (Stock Price) Price Price 
90 45 11/2 
60 48 Jl/2 21/2 
30 51 21/2 4 1/2 
0 53 3 51/2 
THE PROBABILITIES ARE GOOD 
This is a strategy with a rather large probability of profit, provided that the defensive 
action described above is adhered to. The spread will make money if the stock never 
rallies above the striking price, since the spread is established for a credit. This in 
===== PDF page index 252 =====
Chapter 12: Combining Calendar and Ratio Spreads 227 
itself is a rather high-probability event, because the stock is initially below the strik­
ing price. In addition, the spread can make large potential profits if the stock rallies 
after the near-term calls expire. Although this is a much less probable event, the prof­
its that can accrue add to the expected return of the spread. The only time the spread 
loses is when the stock rallies quickly, and the strategist should close out the spread 
in that case to limit losses. 
Although Table 12-2 is not mathematically definitive, it can be seen that this 
strategy has a positive expected return. Small profits occur more frequently than 
small losses do, and sometimes large profits can occur. These expected outcomes, 
when coupled with the fact that the strategist may utilize collateral such as stocks, 
bonds, or government securities to set up these spreads, demonstrate that this is a 
viable strategy for the advanced investor. 
TABLE 12-2. 
Profitability of ratio calendar spreading. 
Event 
Stock never rallies above 
strike 
Stock rallies above strike in a 
short time 
Stock rallies above strike after 
near-term call expires 
Outcome 
Small profit. 
Small loss if defensive 
action employed 
Large potential profit 
DELTA-NEUTRAL CALENDAR SPREADS 
Probability 
Large probability 
Small probability 
Small probability 
The preceding discussion dealt with a specific kind of ratio calendar spread, the out­
of-the-money call spread. A more accurate ratio can be constructed using the deltas 
of the calls involved, similar to the ratio spreads in Chapter 11. The spread can be 
created with either out-of-the-money calls or in-the-money calls. The former has 
naked calls, while the latter has extra long calls. Both types of ratio calendars are 
described. 
In either case, the number of calls to sell for each one purchased is determined 
by dividing the delta of the long call by the delta of the short call. This is the same 
for any ratio spread, not just calendars. 
Example: Suppose XYZ is trading at 45 and one is considering using the July 50 call 
and the April 50 call to establish a ratio calendar spread. This is the same situation 
===== PDF page index 253 =====
228 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
that was described earlier in this chapter. Furthermore, assume that the deltas of the 
calls in question are .25 for the July and .15 for the April. Given that information, one 
can compute the neutral ratio to be 1.667 to 1 (.25/.15). That is, one would sell 1.667 
calls for each one he bought; restated, he would sell 5 for each 3 bought. 
This out-of-the-money neutral calendar is typical. One normally sells more calls 
than he buys to establish a neutral calendar when the calls are out-of-the-money. The 
ramifications of this strategy have already been described in this chapter. Follow-up 
strategy is slightly different, though, and is described later. 
THE IN-THE-MONEY CALENDAR SPREAD 
When the calls are in-the-money, the neutral spread has a distinctly different look. 
An example will help in describing the situation. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 49, and one wants to establish a neutral calendar spread 
using the July 45 and April 45 calls. The deltas of these in-the-money calls are .8 for 
the April and .7 for the July. Note that for in-the-rrwney calls, a shorter-term call has 
a higher delta than a longer-term call. 
The neutral ratio for this in-the-money spread would be .875 to 1 (.7/.8). This 
means that .875 calls would be sold for each one bought; restated, 7 calls would be 
sold and 8 bought. Thus, the spreader is buying more calls than he is selling when 
establishing an in-the-money neutral calendar. In some sense, one is establishing 
some "regular'' calendar spreads (seven of them, in this example) and simultaneous­
ly buying a few extra long calls to go along with them ( one extra long call, in this 
example). 
This type of position can be quite attractive. First of all, there is no risk to the 
upside as there is with the out-of-the-money calendar; the in-the-money calendar 
would make money, because there are extra long calls in the position. Thus, if there 
were to be a large gap to the upside in XYZ perhaps caused by a takeover attempt 
- the in-the-money calendar would make money. If, on the other hand, XYZ stays in 
the same area, then the regular calendar spread portion of the strategy will make 
money. Even though the extra call would probably lose some time value premium in 
that event, the other seven spreads would make a large enough profit to easily com­
pensate for the loss on the one long call. The least desirable result would be for XYZ 
to drop precipitously. However, in that case, the loss is limited to the amount of the 
initial debit of the spread. Even in the case of XYZ dropping, though, follow-up 
action can be taken. There are no naked calls to margin with this strategy, making it 
attractive to many smaller investors. In the above example, one would need to pay for 
the entire debit of the position, but there would be no further requirements. 