
===== PDF page index 830 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 775 
Overall, the bullish spread position is an attractive alternative to an outright call 
purchase, especially when the call is overpriced. The spread does risk a greater 
amount of money if the underlying stock should collapse heavily. Still, if one is truly 
bullish, and if one employs a reasonably tight downside stop on his entire position, 
this spread can perform better than the outright purchase of an overpriced call. 
VERTICAL PUT SPREADS 
Also of interest is the effect that implied volatility has on put spreads. One of the 
more popular strategies involving puts is the sale of a credit spread - a bull spread 
with puts. Assume that a stock is selling at 100, and one is going to sell a put with a 
110 strike and buy a put with a 90 strike. That is a put credit (bull) spread. Also 
assume that the options have four months of life remaining. (See Table 37-8.) 
One would not rationally sell this credit spread if implied volatility were as low 
as 20%, because at that low level of volatility, the in-the-money December llO put is 
trading for 10 dollars - parity - and thus would immediately be at risk of early 
assignment. But one can see that an increase in implied volatility increases the value 
of the spread. Now, if one had sold this spread to begin with, he would thus be los­
ing money when implied volatility increased. This was proven with call bull spreads, 
too: They lose money when implied volatility increases. Conversely, of course, the 
put credit spread makes money when implied volatility decreases. 
What happens after thirty days have passed? Figure 37-8 shows just two cases 
- implied volatility at 30% and implied volatility at 80%. One can surmise that other 
levels of implied volatility between 30% and 80% would have profit graphs that lie 
between the two shown in Figure 37-8. 
TABLE 37-8 
Implied 
Volatility 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
*Short option trading at parity 
90-110 
Put Bull Spread 
(Theoretical Value) 
9.15 er* 
9.70 er 
10. 12 er 
10.46 er 
10.78 er 
11.05 er 
11.33 er 
===== PDF page index 831 =====
776 
FIGURE 37-8. 
Put credit (bull) spread profit in 30 days. 
1000 
500 
- 1000 _ _,±8± 
Assignment Risk Area 
IV=30% 
Stock 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
-~ 
IV= 30% 
130 140 
First, one can observe that a bull put spread does not widen out to anywhere 
near its maximum potential if implied volatility increases. The same thing was seen 
with the call bull spread in the previous section. But a put bull spreader is caught in 
another trap: If implied volatility falls and the stock falls too, the risk of early assign­
ment materializes quicky. Note the shaded area at the lower left of the graph, extend­
ing from a price of about 94 on down. After thirty days (so there would be three 
months life remaining at that point in time), if implied volatility is 30%, the 110 put 
(the short put) would be trading at parity for stock prices of 94 and below. Thus, it 
would be at risk of early assignment. If implied volatility were even lower, the puts 
would be at parity for much higher stock prices. 
Now, in and of itself, early assignment on an equity or futures put spread is not 
necessarily a terrible thing. There will be a request for additional margin (because 
the stock has to be paid for or the futures contract margined), but the risk is still the 
same in dollar terms. Of course, the request for extra margin could be backbreaking 
for a stock trader if he can't afford to fully pay for the stock, and the early assignment 
would probably incur additional commission costs, too. However, with cash-based 
index options there is a more serious increase in risk after an early assignment, 
because one is left with only the long side of the spread. If that option happens to 
have substantial value, then there is considerable risk if the underlying should quick­
ly move higher. In fact, by the time one unwinds the spread, he might actually end 
up losing more than his original limited risk amount - all due to the early assignment. 
(This could happen if the underlying first plunges in price, placing both options 
===== PDF page index 832 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 777 
deeply in-the-money, after which one gets assigned on the short put option, followed 
by the underlying then dramatically rising in price.) 
The lesson to be learned is this: If one is considering using bull spreads in which 
at least one of the options is at- or in-the-rrwney, then a call bull spread is a superior 
choice over a put bull spread. Early assignment is not really a consideration for most 
call spreads. 
In both cases, however, a more serious problem exists, and that is that the 
spread does not widen out much even when the stock makes a nice bullish move. 
Thus, once again it is actually better to buy a call option in most cases than to use the 
bull spread, because profits are larger and an increase in implied volatility is a favor­
able thing for an outright call buyer. 
Note that these effects are similar, but much less pronounced, for out-of-the­
money put credit spreads. Still, it should be noted that an increase in implied volatil­
ity will harm an out-of-the-money put credit spread, too. Hence, if the underlying 
goes into a rapid fall (crash, plunge), then implied volatility usually increases quickly 
and dramatically. So an out-of-the-money credit spreader is hit with the double 
whammy of expanding implied volatility and the fact that the underlying is fast 
approaching the strike price of his options, . thereby expanding the price of the 
spread. 
PUT BEAR SPREADS 
What about the put spread in a bearish situation? In a vertical put spread one buys 
the put with the higher strike and sells the put with the lower strike to construct a 
simple put bear spread. Actually, a sudden increase in implied volatility is of help to 
the bear put spread. That is, the spread will widen out slightly. To verify this, look at 
Table 37-8 again, only now imagine that one is buying the spread for a debit. Note 
that the smallest debit is at the lower implied volatility- 9.15 debit with IV at 30%. 
If implied volatility were to instantaneously jump to 80%, the spread would widen 
out to 11.33 debit. A very quick profit could be had. So there's a difference right away 
between a debit call bull spread (which loses money when implied volatility sudden­
ly increases) and a debit put bear spread. 
Unfortunately, the other major drawback - that the spread doesn't widen out 
much if the underlying makes a favorable move - is still true. Figure 37-9 shows a 
bear put spread, 30 days hence, for two different implied volatilities. Once again, the 
lower-volatility spread widens out more quickly, because both options tend to go to 
parity in that case. In fact, one can see on the graph that there is early assignment 
risk in the low-volatility case, below a price of about 77 on the stock. That is not a 
===== PDF page index 833 =====
778 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 37-9. 
Bear put spread profit in 30 days. 
1000 IV= 30% 
Assignment 
Risk 
Area 
(/) 
(/) 
0 
...J 
~ 0 
e 70 80 110 120 130 140 
a. 
ff7 
IV= 80% 
-1000 
'~ 
Stock 
problem, though, since the spread would have widened to its maximum potential in 
that case and could just be removed when the risk of early assignment materialized. 
When implied volatility remains high, though, the spread doesn't widen out 
much, even when the stock drops a lot after 30 days. Since it is common for implied 
volatility to rise (even skyrocket) when the underlying drops quickly, the put bear 
spread probably won't widen out much. That may not be a psychologically pleasing 
strategy, because one won't make the level of profits that he had hoped to when the 
underlying fell quickly. 
Once again, it seems that the outright purchase of an option is probably superi­
or to a spread. In these cases, it is true with respect to puts, much as it was with call 
options. Spreading often unnecessarily complicates a trader's outlook. 
CALENDAR SPREADS 
In the earlier chapter on calendar spreads, it was mentioned that an increase in 
implied volatility will cause a calendar spread to widen out. Both options will become 
more expensive, of course, since the increase in implied volatility affects both of 
them, but the absolute price change will be greatest in the long-term option. 
Therefore, the calendar spread will widen. This may seem somewhat counterintu­
itive, especially where highly volatile stocks are concerned, so some examples may 
prove useful. 
===== PDF page index 834 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 779 
Example: Suppose that XYZ is trading at 100, and one is interested in a calendar 
spread in which an August (5-month) call is bought and a May (2-month) call is sold. 
For the purpose of this example, it will be assumed that these are both at-the-money 
options. First, the vegas of the two options will be examined, assuming that implied 
volatility is 40%: 
Stock: 100 
Implied Volatility: 
40% Option 
Sell May 100 call 
Buy August 1 00 call 
Theoretical Price 
6.91 
11.22 
Vega 
0.162 
0.251 
In theory, this spread should be worth 4.31 - the difference in the theoretical 
values. Perhaps more important, it has volatility exposure of 0.089 - the difference 
between the vega of the long call and that of the short call. Since vega is positive, this 
means that an increase in implied volatility will be beneficial to the spread. In other 
words, one can expect the spread to widen if implied volatility rises, and can expect 
the spread to shrink if implied volatility declines. 
The following table can also be constructed, showing the theoretical value of 
the spread at various levels of implied volatility. This table makes the assumption that 
very little time has passed ( only one week) before the implied volatility changes take 
place. It also assumes that the stock is still at 100. 
Stock Price: 100 
One week ofter the spread hos been established: 
Implied Volatility Theoretical Spread Value 
20% 2.58 
30% 3.52 
40% 4.46 
50% 5.40 
60% 6.33 
80% 8.16 
100% 12.92 
From the above data, it is quite obvious that implied volatility levels have a huge 
effect on the value of a calendar spread. The actual initial contribution of time decay 
is rather small in comparison. For example, note that if volatility remains unchanged 
at 40%, then the spread will have widened only slightly - to 4.46 from 4.31 - after 
the passage of one week's time. That is small in comparison to the changes dictated 
by volatility expansion or contraction. 
===== PDF page index 835 =====
780 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
A common mistake that calendar spreaders make is to think that such a spread 
looks overly attractive on a very volatile stock. Consider the same stock as above, still 
trading at 100, but for some reason implied volatility has skyrocketed to 80% (per­
haps a takeover rumor is present). 
Stock: JOO 
Implied Volatility: 80% 
Coll 
May 100 call 
June 100 call 
Theoretical Value 
12.55 
16.81 
On the surface, this seems like a very attractive spread. There are two months 
of life remaining in the May options (and three months in the Junes) and the spread 
is trading at 4.36. However, both options are completely composed of time value 
premium, and most certainly the June 100 call would be worth far more than 4.36 
when the May expires, if the stock is still near 100. The fact that many traders miss 
when they think of the calendar spread this way is that the June call will only be 
worth "far more than 4.36" if implied volatility holds up. If implied volatility for this 
stock is normally something on the order of 40%, say, then it is probably not reason­
able to expect that the 80% level will hold up. Just for comparison, note that if the 
stock is at 100 at May expiration - the maximum profit potential for such a calendar 
spread - the June 100 call, with implied volatility now at 40%, and with one month 
of life remaining, would be worth only 4. 77. Thus the spread would only have made 
a profit of a few cents (4.36 to 4.77), and if the underlying stock were farther from 
the strike price at expiration, there would probably be a loss rather than a profit. 
The point to be remembered is that a calendar spread is a "long volatility" play 
(and a reverse calendar spread is just the opposite). Evaluate the position's risk with 
an eye to what might happen to implied volatility, and not just to where the stock 
price might go or how much time decay there might be in the position. 
RATIO SPREADS AND BACKSPREADS 
The previous descriptions in this chapter describe fairly fully and accurately what 
the effect of volatility changes are. More complicated strategies are usually nothing 
more than combinations of the strategies presented earlier, so it is easy to discern 
the effect that changes in implied volatility would have; just combine the effects on 
the simpler strategies. For example, a ratio call write is really just the equivalent of 
a straddle sale - a strategy whose volatility ramifications are fairly simple to under­
stand. 
Ratio spreads, on the other hand, might not be as intuitive to interpret, but they 
are fairly simple nonetheless. A call ratio spread is really just the combination of some 
===== PDF page index 836 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 781 
call bull spreads and some naked call options. For example, a call ratio spread might 
consist of buying an XYZ July 100 call and selling two XYZ July 120 calls. If one were 
to break it down into its components, this spread is really long one XYZ July 100-120 
call bull spread, plus an additional naked July 120 call. 
We already know that an increase in implied volatility is very detrimental to a 
naked call option. In addition, it was shown earlier than an increase in implied volatil­
ity actually harms the value of an at-the-money call bull spread. So, for a ratio call 
spread, both components are harmed by an increase in implied volatility. Conversely, 
a decrease in implied volatility would be beneficial to a ratio spread, but where naked 
options are concerned, one should be more mindful of his risk than of this reward. 
It was also shown previously that a call bull spread does not widen out much if 
the underlying stock makes a quick upward move. The spread won't widen out to its 
maximum profit potential until expiration draws nigh or the stock is well above the 
upper strike in the spread. This scenario also does not bode well for the ratio call 
spread. Suppose that the underlying stock suddenly jumps upward and implied 
volatility increases at the same time. That combination is seen quite frequently, espe­
cially if the stock were previously "dull" or if there is some sort of active corporate 
(takeover) rumor. The call ratio spread will fare miserably under these conditions, 
because the increase in stock price certainly harms the naked call position and the 
bull spread is not widening out much to compensate for it. In addition, the increase 
in implied volatility is working against both components. 
The same sort of thing happens with put ratio spreads. They are really the com­
bination of a put bear spread plus some additional naked put options. If the under­
lying falls in price, while implied volatility increases - a very common occurrence in 
all markets then the put ratio spread will fare poorly. In fact, implied volatility 
sometimes explodes if the underlying falls very rapidly (crashes), so the ratio put 
spreader should clearly assess his risk in this light. 
In summary, a trader utilizing ratio spread strategies should clearly understand 
and attempt to analyze the risks of an increase in implied volatility. This includes not 
only assessing the vega risk of the spread, but also using a probability calculator with 
some inflated volatility estimates to see just what the chances are of the spread get­
ting into real trouble. 
BACKSPREADS 
A call backspread is merely the opposite of a call ratio spread. Thus, any of the earli­
er commentary about how an increase in implied volatility is detrimental to a ratio 
spread can be reversed when discussing the backspread. An increase in implied 
volatility will be beneficial to a backspread strategy, while a decrease in implied 
===== PDF page index 837 =====
782 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
volatility will be slightly harmful to the spread. However, since risk is limited in a 
backspread, such a decrease in implied volatility would not have catastrophic conse­
quences unless one had overcommitted his funds to one position. 
SUMMARY 
In general, one can always determine the exposure of his position to volatility by com­
puting the vega of this position. However, it is also useful for a strategist to have some 
general feeling for how implied volatility will affect his positions and strategies. Thus, 
this chapter was designed to point out the most common effects that changes .in 
implied volatility will have on the basic types of option strategies. Once one has a 
feeling for his exposure to volatility, he can then assess whether an adverse volatility 
movement is likely. For example, if an increase in implied volatility would be harm­
ful, and the strategist sees that current levels of implied volatility are quite low in 
comparison to historical norms, then perhaps he should remove or adjust the posi­
tion. 
Volatility and the price of the underlying are the two major components 
affecting profitability for most option positions. Time decay is only most pertinent 
as expiration approaches. Yet, many traders concentrate greatly on potential price 
movements of the underlying, often while ignoring what changes in implied volatil­
ity could do. That is a mistake, for the most knowledgeable option traders plan for 
volatility risk at all times. Understanding and handling that risk can have a positive 
effect on an option trader's profits. 
===== PDF page index 838 =====
The Distribution of 
Stock Prices 
Much of the work that has been done in statistics and related areas regarding the 
stock market has made the assumption that stock prices are distributed normally, or 
more specifically, lognonnally. In actual practice, this is usually an incorrect assump­
tion. For the option strategist, this means that some of the things one might believe 
about certain option strategies having an advantage over certain other option strate­
gies might be incorrect. In this chapter, a number of facts concerning stock price dis­
tribution will be brought to light, including how it might affect the option strategist. 
MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT VOLATILITY 
Statistics are used to estimate stock price movement (and futures and indices as well) 
in many areas of financial analysis. Many authors have written extensively about the 
use of probabilities to aid in choosing viable option strategies. Stock mutual fund 
managers often use volatility estimates to help them determine how risky their port­
folios are. The uses are myriad. Unfortunately, almost all of these applications are 
wrong! Perhaps wrong is too strong a word, but almost all estimates of stock price 
movement are overly conservative. This can be very dangerous if one is using such 
estimates for the purposes of, say, writing naked options or engaging in some other 
such strategy in which volatile stock price movement is undesirable. 
As a review for those not familiar with mathematical distributions, the lognor­
mal distribution is what's commonly used to describe stock prices because its shape 
is intuitively similar to the way stocks behave - they can't go below zero, they can rise 
to infinity, and most of the time they don't go much of anywhere. On top of that, the 
distribution's shape is based on the historical volatility of the underlying instrument. 
In a lognormal distribution (and normal distribution, too), stocks remain within 3 
standard deviations of their current price 99. 7 4% of the time. A standard deviation 
783 