
===== PDF page index 348 =====
314 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
position. Another advantage of buying the protection initially is that one is protected 
if the stock should experience a gap opening or a trading halt. If he already owns the 
protection, such stock price movement in the direction of the protection is of little 
consequence. However, if he was planning to buy the protection as a follow-up 
action, the sudden surge in the stock price may ruin his strategy. 
The overall profit potential of this position is smaller than that of the normal 
straddle write, since the premium paid for the long call will be lost if the stock is 
below 50 at expiration. However, the automatic risk-limiting feature of the long call 
may prove to be worth more than the decrease in profit potential. The strategist has 
peace of mind in a rally and does not have to worry about unlimited losses accruing 
to the upside. 
Downside protection for a straddle writer can be achieved in a similar manner 
by buying an out-of-the-money put at the outset. 
Example: With XYZ at 45, one might write the January 45 straddle for 7 and buy a 
January 40 put for l point if he is concerned about the stock dropping in price. 
It should now be fairly easy to see that the straddle writer could limit risk in 
either direction by initially buying both an out-of-the-money call and an out-of-the­
money put at the same time that the straddle is written. The major benefit in doing 
this is that risk is limited in either direction. Moreover, the margin requirements are 
significantly reduced, since the whole position consists of a call spread and a put 
spread. There are no longer any naked options. The detriment of buying protection 
on both sides initially is that commission costs increase and the overall profit poten­
tial of the straddle write is reduced, perhaps significantly, by the cost of two long 
options. Therefore, one must evaluate whether the cost of the protection is too large 
in comparison to what is received for the straddle write. This completely protected 
strategy can be very attractive when available, and it is described again in Chapter 23, 
Spreads Combining Calls and Puts. 
In summary, any strategy in which the straddle writer also decides to buy pro­
tection presents both advantages and disadvantages. Obviously, the risk-limiting fea­
ture of the purchased options is an advantage. However, the seller of options does not 
like to purchase pure time value premium as protection at any time. He would gen­
erally prefer to buy intrinsic value. The reader will note that, in each of the protec­
tive buying strategies discussed above, the purchased option has a large amount of 
time value premium left in it. Therefore, the ·writer must often try to strike a delicate 
balance between trying to limit his risk on one hand and trying to hold down the 
expenses of buying long options on the other hand. In the final analysis, however, the 
risk must be limited regardless of the cost. 
===== PDF page index 349 =====
314 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
position. Another advantage of buying the protection initially is that one is protected 
if the stock should expe1ience a gap opening or a trading halt. If he already owns the 
protection, such stock price movement in the direction of the protection is of little 
consequence. However, if he was planning to buy the protection as a follow-up 
action, the sudden surge in the stock price may ruin his strategy. 
The overall profit potential of this position is smaller than that of the normal 
straddle write, since the premium paid for the long call will be lost if the stock is 
below 50 at ex-piration. However, the automatic risk-limiting feature of the long call 
may prove to be worth more than the decrease in profit potential. The strategist has 
peace of mind in a rally and does not have to worry about unlimited losses accruing 
to the upside. 
Downside protection for a straddle writer can be achieved in a similar manner 
by buying an out-of-the-money put at the outset. 
Example: With XYZ at 45, one might write the January 45 straddle for 7 and buy a 
January 40 put for l point if he is concerned about the stock dropping in price. 
It should now be fairly easy to see that the straddle writer could limit risk in 
either direction by initially buying both an out-of-the-money call and an out-of-the­
money put at the same time that the straddle is written. The major benefit in doing 
this is that risk is limited in either direction. Moreover, the margin requirements are 
significantly reduced, since the whole position consists of a call spread and a put 
spread. There are no longer any naked options. The detriment of buying protection 
on both sides initially is that commission costs increase and the overall profit poten­
tial of the straddle write is reduced, perhaps significantly, by the cost of two long 
options. Therefore, one must evaluate whether the cost of the protection is too large 
in comparison to what is received for the straddle write. This completely protected 
strategy can be very attractive when available, and it is described again in Chapter 23, 
Spreads Combining Calls and Puts. 
In summary, any strategy in which the straddle writer also decides to buy pro­
tection presents both advantages and disadvantages. Obviously, the risk-limiting fea­
ture of the purchased options is an advantage. However, the seller of options does not 
like to purchase pure time value premium as protection at any time. He would gen­
erally prefer to buy intrinsic value. The reader will note that, in each of the protec­
tive buying strategies discussed above, the purchased option has a large amount of 
time value premium left in it. Therefore, the writer must often try to strike a delicate 
balance between trying to limit his risk on one hand and trying to hold down the 
expenses of buying long options on the other hand. In the final analysis, however, the 
risk must be limited regardless of the cost. 
===== PDF page index 350 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 315 
STRANGLE (COMBINATION) WRITING 
Recall that a strangle is any position involving both puts and calls, when there is some 
difference in the terms of the options. Commonly, the puts and calls will have the 
same expiration date but differing striking prices. A strangle write is usually estab­
lished by selling both an out-of-the-money put and an out-of-the-money call with the 
stock approximately centered between the two striking prices. In this way, the naked 
option writer can remain neutral on the outlook for the underlying stock, even when 
the stock is not near a striking price. 
This strategy is quite similar to straddle writing, except that the strangle 
writer makes his maximum profit over a much wider range than the straddle 
writer does. In this or any other naked writing strategy, the most money that the 
strategist can make is the amount of the premium received. The straddle writer 
has only a minute chance of making a profit of the entire straddle premium, since 
the stock would have to be exactly at the striking price at expiration in order for 
both the written put and call to expire worthless. The strangle writer will make his 
maximum profit potential if the stock is anywhere between the two strikes at expi­
ration, because both options will expire worthless in that case. This strategy is 
equivalent to the variable ratio write described previously in Chapter 6 on ratio 
call writing. 
Example: Given the following prices: 
XYZ common, 65; 
XYZ January 70 call, 4; and 
XYZ January 60 put, 3, 
a strangle write would be established by selling the January 70 call and the January 
60 put. IfXYZ is anywhere between 60 and 70 at January expiration, both options will 
expire worthless and the strangle writer will make a profit of 7 points, the amount of 
the original credit taken in. If XYZ is above 70 at expiration, the strategist will have 
to pay something to buy back the call. For example, if XYZ is at 77 at expiration, the 
January 70 call will have to be bought back for 7 points, thereby creating a break-even 
situation. To the downside, if XYZ were at 53 at expiration, the January 60 put would 
have to be bought back for 7 points, thereby defining that as the downside break­
even point. Table 20-3 and Figure 20-3 outline the potential results of this strangle 
write. The profit range in this example is quite wide, extending from 53 on the down­
side to 77 on the upside. With the stock presently at 65, this is a relatively neutral 
position. 
===== PDF page index 351 =====
316 
TABLE 20-3. 
Results of a combination write. 
Stock Price at Coll 
Expiration Profit 
40 +$ 400 
50 + 400 
53 + 400 
57 + 400 
60 + 400 
65 + 400 
70 + 400 
73 + 100 
77 300 
80 600 
90 - 1,600 
FIGURE 20-3. 
Sale of a combination. 
C: 
~ +$700 
·5. 
X 
UJ 
rn 
en en 
0 ....I 
ci 
e a.. 
$0 
Put 
Profit 
$1,700 
700 
400 
0 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Total 
Profit 
-$1,300 
300 
0 
+ 400 
+ 700 
+ 700 
+ 700 
+ 400 
0 
300 
- 1,300 
At first glance, this may seem to be a more conservative strategy than straddle 
writing, because the profit range is wider and the stock needs to move a great deal to 
reach the break-even points. In the absence of follow-up action, this is a true obser­
vation. However, if the stock begins to rise quickly or to drop dramatically, the stran­
gle writer often has little recourse but to buy back the in-the-money option in order 
===== PDF page index 352 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 317 
to limit his losses. This can, as has been shown previously, entail a purchase price 
involving excess amounts of time value premium, thereby generating a significant 
loss. 
The only other alternative that is available to the strangle writer ( outside of 
attempting to trade out of the position) is to convert the position into a straddle if the 
stock reaches either break-even point. 
Example: IfXYZ rose to 70 or 71 in the previous example, the January 70 put would 
be sold. Depending on the amount of collateral available, the January 60 put may or 
may not be bought back when the January 70 put is sold. This action of converting 
the strangle write into a straddle write will work out well if the stock stabilizes. It 
will also lessen the pain if the stock continues to rise. However, if the stock revers­
es direction, the January 70 put write will prove to be unprofitable. Technical analy­
sis of the underlying stock may prove to be of some help in deciding whether or not 
to convert the strangle write into a straddle. If there appears to be a relatively large 
chance that the stock could fall back in price, it is probably not worthwhile to roll 
the put up. 
This example of a strangle write is one in which the writer received a large 
amount of premium for selling the put and the call. Many times, however, an aggres­
sive strangle writer is tempted to sell two out-of-the-money options that have only a 
short life remaining. These options would generally be sold at fractional prices. This 
can be an extremely aggressive strategy at times, for if the underlying stock should 
move quickly in either direction through a striking price, there is little the strangle 
writer can do. He must buy in the options to limit his loss. Nevertheless, this type of 
strangle writing - selling short-term, fractionally priced, out-of-the-money options -
appeals to many writers. This is a similar philosophy to that of the naked call writer 
described in Chapter 5, who writes calls that are nearly restricted, figuring there will 
be a large probability that the option will expire worthless. It also has the same risk: 
A large price change or gap opening can cause such devastating losses that many 
profitable trades are wiped away. Selling fractionally priced combinations is a poor 
strategy and should be avoided. 
Before leaving the topic of strangle writing, it may be useful to determine how 
the margin requirements apply to a strangle write. Recall that the margin require­
ment for writing a straddle is 20% of the stock price plus the price of either the put 
or the call, whichever is in-the-money. In a strangle write, however, both options may 
be out-of-the-money, as in the example above. When this is the case, the straddle 
writer is allowed to deduct the smaller out-of-the-money amount from his require­
ment. Thus, if XYZ were at 68 and the January 60 put and the January 70 call had 
been written, the collateral requirement would be 20% of the stock price, plus the 
===== PDF page index 353 =====
318 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
call premium, less $200 - the lesser out-of-the-money amount. The call is 2 points 
out-of-the-money and the put is 8 points out-of-the-money. Actually, the true collat­
eral requirement for any write involving both puts and calls - straddle write or stran­
gle write - is the greater of the requirement on the put or the call, plus the amount by 
which the other option is in-the-nwney. The last phrase, the amount by which the 
other option is in-the-money, applies to a situation in which a strangle had been con­
structed by selling two in-the-money options. This is a less popular strategy, since the 
writer generally receives less time value premium by writing two in-the-money 
options. An example of an in-the-money strangle is to sell the January 60 call and the 
January 70 put with the stock at 65. 
FURTHER COMMENTS ON UNCOVERED STRADDLE 
AND STRANGLE WRITING 
When ratio writing was discussed, it was noted that it was a strategy with a high prob­
ability of making a limited profit. Since the straddle write is equivalent to the ratio 
write and the strangle write is equivalent to the variable ratio write, the same state­
ment applies to these strategies. The practitioner of straddle and strangle writing 
must realize, however, that protective follow-up action is mandatory in limiting loss­
es in a very volatile market. There are other techniques that the straddle writer can 
sometimes use to help reduce his risk. 
It has often been mentioned that puts lose their time value premium more 
quickly when they become in-the-money options than calls do. One can often con­
struct a neutral position by writing an extra put or two. That is, if one sells 5 or 6 puts 
and 4 calls 'Ai.th the same terms, he may often have created a more neutral position 
than a straddle write. If the stock moves up and the call picks up time premium in a 
bullish market, the extra puts 'Aill help to offset the negative effect of the calls. On 
the other hand, if the stock drops, the 5 or 6 puts will not hold as much time premi­
um as the 4 calls are losing - again a neutral, standoff position. If the stock begins to 
drop too much, the writer can always balance out the position by selling another call 
or two. The advantage of writing an extra put or two is that it counterbalances the 
straddle writer's most severe enemy: a quick, extremely bullish rise by the underly­
ing stock. 
USING THE DELTAS 
This analysis, that adding an extra short put creates a neutral position, can be sub­
stantiated more rigorously. Recall that a ratio writer or ratio spreader can use the 
===== PDF page index 354 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 319 
deltas of the options involved in his position to determine a neutral ratio. The strad­
dle writer can do the same thing, of course. It was stated that the difference between 
a call's delta and a put' s delta is approximately one. Using the same prices as in the 
previous straddle writing example, and assuming the call's delta to be .60, a neutral 
ratio can be determined. 
Prices 
XYZ common: 
XYZ January 45 call: 
XYZ January 45 put: 
45 
4 
3 
Deltas 
.60 
-.40 (.60 - 1) 
The put has a negative delta, to indicate that the put and the underlying stock are 
inversely related. A neutral ratio is determined by dividing the call's delta by the put's 
delta and ignoring the minus sign. The resultant ratio - 1.5:1 (.60/.40) in this case -
is the ratio of puts to sell for each call that is sold. Thus, one should sell 3 puts and 
sell 2 calls to establish a neutral position. The reader may wonder if the assumption 
that an at-the-money call has a delta of .60 is a fair one. It generally is, although very 
long-term calls will have higher at-the-money deltas, and very short-term calls will 
have deltas near .50. Consequently, a 3:2 ratio is often a neutral one. When neutral 
ratios were discussed with respect to ratio writing, it was mentioned that selling 5 
calls and buying 300 shares of stock often results in neutral ratio. The reader should 
note that a straddle constructed by selling 3 puts and 2 calls is equivalent to the ratio 
write in which one sells 5 calls and buys 300 shares of stock. 
If a straddle writer is going to use the deltas to determine his neutral ratio, he 
should compute each one at the time of his initial investment, of course, rather than 
relying on a generality such as that 3 puts and 2 calls often result in a neutral posi­
tion. The deltas can be used as a follow-up action, by adjusting the ratio to remain 
neutral after a move by the underlying stock. 
AVOID EXCESS TRADING 
In any of the straddle and strangle writing strategies described above, too much fol­
low-up action can be detrimental because of the commission costs involved. Thus, 
although it is important to take protective action, the straddle writer should plan in 
advance to make the minimum number of strategic moves to protect himself. That is 
why buying protection is often useful; not only does it limit the risk in the direction 
that the stock is moving, but it also involves only one additional option commission. 
In fact, if it is feasible, buying protection at the outset is often a better strategy than 
protecting as a secondary action. 
===== PDF page index 355 =====
320 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
An extension of this concept of trying to avoid too much follow-up action is that 
the strategist should not attempt to anticipate movement in an underlying stock. For 
example, if the straddle writer has planned to take defensive action should the stock 
reach 50, he should not anticipate by taking action with the stock at 48 or 49. It is 
possible that the stock could retreat back down; then the writer would have taken a 
defensive action that not only cost him commissions, but reduced his profit potential. 
Of course, there is a little trader in everyone, and the temptation to anticipate (or to 
wait too long) is always there. Unless there are very strong technical reasons for doing 
so, the strategist should resist the temptation to trade, and should operate his strate­
gy according to his original plan. The ratio writer may actually have an advantage in 
this respect, because he can use buy and sell stops on the underlying stock to remove 
the emotion from his follow-up strategy. This technique was described in Chapter 6 
on ratio call writing. Unfortunately, no such emotionless technique exists for the 
straddle or strangle writer. 
USING THE CREDITS 
In previous chapters, it was mentioned that the sale of uncovered options does not 
require any cash investment on the pait of the strategist. He may use the collateral 
value of his present portfolio to finance the sale of naked options. Moreover, once he 
sells the uncovered options, he can take the premium dollars that he has brought in 
from the sales to buy fixed-income securities, such as Treasury bills. The same state­
ments naturally apply to the straddle writing and strangle writing strategies. However, 
the strategist should not be overly obsessed with continuing to maintain a credit bal­
ance in his positions, nor should he strive to hold onto the Treasury bills at all costs. If 
one's follow-up actions dictate that he must take a debit to avoid losses or that he 
should sell out his Treasury bills to keep a credit, he should by all means do so. 
===== PDF page index 356 =====
Synthetic Stock Positions 
Created by Puts and Calls 
It is possible for a strategist to establish a position that is essentially the same as a 
stock position, and he can do this using only options. The option position generally 
requires a smaller margin investment and may have other residual benefits over sim­
ply buying stock or selling stock short. In brief, the strategies are summarized by: 
1. Buy call and sell put instead of buying stock. 
2. Buy put and sell call instead of selling stock short. 
SYNTHETIC LONG STOCK 
When one buys a call and sells a put at the same strike, he sets up a position that is 
equivalent to owning the stock. His position is sometimes called "synthetic" long 
stock. 
Example: To verify that this option position acts much like a long stock position 
would, suppose that the following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
XYZ January 50 call, 5; and 
XYZ January 50 put, 4. 
If one were bullish on XYZ and wanted to buy stock at 50, he might consider the 
alternative strategy of buying the January 50 call and selling (uncovered) the January 
321 