
===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
Rich.”* His thesis was that savings of only $15 per month invested
in good common stocks—with dividends reinvested—would pro-
duce an estate of $80,000 in twenty years against total contributions
of only $3,600. If the General Motors tycoon was right, this was
indeed a simple road to riches. How nearly right was he? Our
rough calculation—based on assumed investment in the 30 stocks
making up the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA)—indicates
that if Raskob’s prescription had been followed during 1929–1948,
the investor’s holdings at the beginning of 1949 would have been
worth about $8,500. This is a far cry from the great man’s promise
of $80,000, and it shows how little reliance can be placed on such
optimistic forecasts and assurances. But, as an aside, we should
remark that the return actually realized by the 20-year operation
would have been better than 8% compounded annually—and this
despite the fact that the investor would have begun his purchases
with the DJIA at 300 and ended with a valuation based on the 1948
closing level of 177. This record may be regarded as a persuasive
argument for the principle of regular monthly purchases of strong
common stocks through thick and thin—a program known as 
“dollar-cost averaging.”
Since our book is not addressed to speculators, it is not meant
for those who trade in the market. Most of these people are guided
by charts or other largely mechanical means of determining the
right moments to buy and sell. The one principle that applies to
nearly all these so-called “technical approaches” is that one should
buy because a stock or the market has gone up and one should sell
because it has declined. This is the exact opposite of sound business
sense everywhere else, and it is most unlikely that it can lead to
2 Introduction
* Raskob (1879–1950) was a director of Du Pont, the giant chemical com-
pany, and chairman of the finance committee at General Motors. He also
served as national chairman of the Democratic Party and was the driving
force behind the construction of the Empire State Building. Calculations by
finance professor Jeremy Siegel confirm that Raskob’s plan would have
grown to just under $9,000 after 20 years, although inflation would have
eaten away much of that gain. For the best recent look at Raskob’s views on
long-term stock investing, see the essay by financial adviser William Bern-
stein at www.efficientfrontier.com/ef/197/raskob.htm.
===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
lasting success on Wall Street. In our own stock-market experience
and observation, extending over 50 years, we have not known a
single person who has consistently or lastingly made money by
thus “following the market.” We do not hesitate to declare that this
approach is as fallacious as it is popular. We shall illustrate what
we have just said—though, of course this should not be taken as
proof—by a later brief discussion of the famous Dow theory for
trading in the stock market.*
Since its first publication in 1949, revisions of The Intelligent
Investor have appeared at intervals of approximately five years. In
updating the current version we shall have to deal with quite a
number of new developments since the 1965 edition was written.
These include:
1. An unprecedented advance in the interest rate on high-grade
bonds.
2. A fall of about 35% in the price level of leading common
stocks, ending in May 1970. This was the highest percentage
decline in some 30 years. (Countless issues of lower quality
had a much larger shrinkage.)
3. A persistent inflation of wholesale and consumer’s prices,
which gained momentum even in the face of a decline of gen-
eral business in 1970.
4. The rapid development of “conglomerate” companies, fran-
chise operations, and other relative novelties in business and
finance. (These include a number of tricky devices such as “let-
ter stock,” 1 proliferation of stock-option warrants, misleading
names, use of foreign banks, and others.)†
What This Book Expects to Accomplish 3
* Graham’s “brief discussion” is in two parts, on p. 33 and pp. 191–192.
For more detail on the Dow Theory, see http://viking.som.yale.edu/will/
dow/dowpage.html.
† Mutual funds bought “letter stock” in private transactions, then immedi-
ately revalued these shares at a higher public price (see Graham’s definition
on p. 579). That enabled these “go-go” funds to report unsustainably high
returns in the mid-1960s. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
cracked down on this abuse in 1969, and it is no longer a concern for fund
investors. Stock-option warrants are explained in Chapter 16.
===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
5. Bankruptcy of our largest railroad, excessive short- and long-
term debt of many formerly strongly entrenched companies,
and even a disturbing problem of solvency among Wall Street
houses.*
6. The advent of the “performance” vogue in the management of
investment funds, including some bank-operated trust funds,
with disquieting results.
These phenomena will have our careful consideration, and some
will require changes in conclusions and emphasis from our previ-
ous edition. The underlying principles of sound investment should
not alter from decade to decade, but the application of these princi-
ples must be adapted to significant changes in the financial mecha-
nisms and climate.
The last statement was put to the test during the writing of the
present edition, the first draft of which was finished in January
1971. At that time the DJIA was in a strong recovery from its 1970
low of 632 and was advancing toward a 1971 high of 951, with
attendant general optimism. As the last draft was finished, in
November 1971, the market was in the throes of a new decline, car-
rying it down to 797 with a renewed general uneasiness about its
future. We have not allowed these fluctuations to affect our general
attitude toward sound investment policy, which remains substan-
tially unchanged since the first edition of this book in 1949.
The extent of the market’s shrinkage in 1969–70 should have
served to dispel an illusion that had been gaining ground dur-
ing the past two decades. This was that leading common stocks
could be bought at any time and at any price, with the assurance not
only of ultimate profit but also that any intervening loss would soon
be recouped by a renewed advance of the market to new high lev-
4 Introduction
* The Penn Central Transportation Co., then the biggest railroad in the
United States, sought bankruptcy protection on June 21, 1970—shocking
investors, who had never expected such a giant company to go under (see
p. 423). Among the companies with “excessive” debt Graham had in mind
were Ling-Temco-Vought and National General Corp. (see pp. 425 and
463). The “problem of solvency” on Wall Street emerged between 1968
and 1971, when several prestigious brokerages suddenly went bust.
===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
els. That was too good to be true. At long last the stock market has
“returned to normal,” in the sense that both speculators and stock
investors must again be prepared to experience significant and per-
haps protracted falls as well as rises in the value of their holdings.
In the area of many secondary and third-line common stocks,
especially recently floated enterprises, the havoc wrought by the
last market break was catastrophic. This was nothing new in
itself—it had happened to a similar degree in 1961–62—but there
was now a novel element in the fact that some of the investment
funds had large commitments in highly speculative and obviously
overvalued issues of this type. Evidently it is not only the tyro who
needs to be warned that while enthusiasm may be necessary for
great accomplishments elsewhere, on Wall Street it almost invari-
ably leads to disaster.
The major question we shall have to deal with grows out of the
huge rise in the rate of interest on first-quality bonds. Since late 1967
the investor has been able to obtain more than twice as much
income from such bonds as he could from dividends on representa-
tive common stocks. At the beginning of 1972 the return was 7.19%
on highest-grade bonds versus only 2.76% on industrial stocks.
(This compares with 4.40% and 2.92% respectively at the end of
1964.) It is hard to realize that when we first wrote this book in 1949
the figures were almost the exact opposite: the bonds returned only
2.66% and the stocks yielded 6.82%. 2 In previous editions we have
consistently urged that at least 25% of the conservative investor’s
portfolio be held in common stocks, and we have favored in general
a 50–50 division between the two media. We must now consider
whether the current great advantage of bond yields over stock
yields would justify an all-bond policy until a more sensible rela-
tionship returns, as we expect it will. Naturally the question of con-
tinued inflation will be of great importance in reaching our decision
here. A chapter will be devoted to this discussion.*
What This Book Expects to Accomplish 5
* See Chapter 2. As of the beginning of 2003, U.S. Treasury bonds matur-
ing in 10 years yielded 3.8%, while stocks (as measured by the Dow Jones
Industrial Average) yielded 1.9%. (Note that this relationship is not all that
different from the 1964 figures that Graham cites.) The income generated
by top-quality bonds has been falling steadily since 1981.
===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
In the past we have made a basic distinction between two kinds
of investors to whom this book was addressed—the “defensive”
and the “enterprising.” The defensive (or passive) investor will
place his chief emphasis on the avoidance of serious mistakes or
losses. His second aim will be freedom from effort, annoyance, and
the need for making frequent decisions. The determining trait of
the enterprising (or active, or aggressive) investor is his willingness
to devote time and care to the selection of securities that are both
sound and more attractive than the average. Over many decades
an enterprising investor of this sort could expect a worthwhile
reward for his extra skill and effort, in the form of a better average
return than that realized by the passive investor. We have some
doubt whether a really substantial extra recompense is promised to
the active investor under today’s conditions. But next year or the
years after may well be different. We shall accordingly continue to
devote attention to the possibilities for enterprising investment, as
they existed in former periods and may return.
It has long been the prevalent view that the art of success-
ful investment lies first in the choice of those industries that 
are most likely to grow in the future and then in identifying the
most promising companies in these industries. For example, smart
investors—or their smart advisers—would long ago have recog-
nized the great growth possibilities of the computer industry as a
whole and of International Business Machines in particular. And
similarly for a number of other growth industries and growth com-
panies. But this is not as easy as it always looks in retrospect. To
bring this point home at the outset let us add here a paragraph that
we included first in the 1949 edition of this book.
Such an investor may for example be a buyer of air-transport
stocks because he believes their future is even more brilliant than
the trend the market already reflects. For this class of investor the
value of our book will lie more in its warnings against the pitfalls
lurking in this favorite investment approach than in any positive
technique that will help him along his path.*
6 Introduction
* “Air-transport stocks, ” of course, generated as much excitement in the late
1940s and early 1950s as Internet stocks did a half century later. Among
the hottest mutual funds of that era were Aeronautical Securities and the
===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
The pitfalls have proved particularly dangerous in the industry
we mentioned. It was, of course, easy to forecast that the volume of
air traffic would grow spectacularly over the years. Because of this
factor their shares became a favorite choice of the investment
funds. But despite the expansion of revenues—at a pace even
greater than in the computer industry—a combination of techno-
logical problems and overexpansion of capacity made for fluctuat-
ing and even disastrous profit figures. In the year 1970, despite a
new high in traffic figures, the airlines sustained a loss of some
$200 million for their shareholders. (They had shown losses also in
1945 and 1961.) The stocks of these companies once again showed a
greater decline in 1969–70 than did the general market. The record
shows that even the highly paid full-time experts of the mutual
funds were completely wrong about the fairly short-term future of
a major and nonesoteric industry.
On the other hand, while the investment funds had substantial
investments and substantial gains in IBM, the combination of its
apparently high price and the impossibility of being certain about
its rate of growth prevented them from having more than, say, 3%
of their funds in this wonderful performer. Hence the effect of 
this excellent choice on their overall results was by no means 
decisive. Furthermore, many—if not most—of their investments in
computer-industry companies other than IBM appear to have been
unprofitable. From these two broad examples we draw 
two morals
for our readers:
1. Obvious prospects for physical growth in a business do not
translate into obvious profits for investors.
2. The experts do not have dependable ways of selecting and
concentrating on the most promising companies in the most
promising industries.
What This Book Expects to Accomplish 7
Missiles-Rockets-Jets & Automation Fund. They, like the stocks they owned,
turned out to be an investing disaster. It is commonly accepted today that
the cumulative earnings of the airline industry over its entire history have
been negative. The lesson Graham is driving at is not that you should avoid
buying airline stocks, but that you should never succumb to the “certainty”
that any industry will outperform all others in the future.
===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
The author did not follow this approach in his financial career as
fund manager, and he cannot offer either specific counsel or much
encouragement to those who may wish to try it.
What then will we aim to accomplish in this book? Our main
objective will be to guide the reader against the areas of possible
substantial error and to develop policies with which he will be
comfortable. We shall say quite a bit about the psychology of
investors. For indeed, the investor’s chief problem—and even his
worst enemy—is likely to be himself. (“The fault, dear investor, is
not in our stars—and not in our stocks—but in ourselves. . . .”) This
has proved the more true over recent decades as it has become
more necessary for conservative investors to acquire common
stocks and thus to expose themselves, willy-nilly, to the excitement
and the temptations of the stock market. By arguments, examples,
and exhortation, we hope to aid our readers to establish the proper
mental and emotional attitudes toward their investment decisions.
We have seen much more money made and kept by “ordinary peo-
ple” who were temperamentally well suited for the investment
process than by those who lacked this quality, even though they
had an extensive knowledge of finance, accounting, and stock-
market lore.
Additionally, we hope to implant in the reader a tendency to
measure or quantify. For 99 issues out of 100 we could say that at
some price they are cheap enough to buy and at some other price
they would be so dear that they should be sold. The habit of relat-
ing what is paid to what is being offered is an invaluable trait in
investment. In an article in a women’s magazine many years ago
we advised the readers to buy their stocks as they bought their gro-
ceries, not as they bought their perfume. The really dreadful losses
of the past few years (and on many similar occasions before) were
realized in those common-stock issues where the buyer forgot to
ask “How much?”
In June 1970 the question “How much?” could be answered by
the magic figure 9.40%—the yield obtainable on new offerings of
high-grade public-utility bonds. This has now dropped to about
7.3%, but even that return tempts us to ask, “Why give any other
answer?” But there are other possible answers, and these must be
carefully considered. Besides which, we repeat that both we and
our readers must be prepared in advance for the possibly quite dif-
ferent conditions of, say, 1973–1977.
8 Introduction
===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
We shall therefore present in some detail a positive program for
common-stock investment, part of which is within the purview of
both classes of investors and part is intended mainly for the enter-
prising group. Strangely enough, we shall suggest as one of our
chief requirements here that our readers limit themselves to issues
selling not far above their tangible-asset value.* The reason for 
this seemingly outmoded counsel is both practical and psychologi-
cal. Experience has taught us that, while there are many good
growth companies worth several times net assets, the buyer of
such shares will be too dependent on the vagaries and fluctuations
of the stock market. By contrast, the investor in shares, say, of 
public-utility companies at about their net-asset value can always
consider himself the owner of an interest in sound and expanding
businesses, acquired at a rational price—regardless of what the
stock market might say to the contrary. The ultimate result of such
a conservative policy is likely to work out better than exciting
adventures into the glamorous and dangerous fields of anticipated
growth.
The art of investment has one characteristic that is not generally
appreciated. A creditable, if unspectacular, result can be achieved
by the lay investor with a minimum of effort and capability; but to
improve this easily attainable standard requires much application
and more than a trace of wisdom. If you merely try to bring just a
little extra knowledge and cleverness to bear upon your investment
program, instead of realizing a little better than normal results, you
may well find that you have done worse.
Since anyone—by just buying and holding a representative
list—can equal the performance of the market averages, it would
seem a comparatively simple matter to “beat the averages”; but as
a matter of fact the proportion of smart people who try this and fail
is surprisingly large. Even the majority of the investment funds,
with all their experienced personnel, have not performed so well
What This Book Expects to Accomplish 9
* Tangible assets include a company’s physical property (like real estate,
factories, equipment, and inventories) as well as its financial balances (such
as cash, short-term investments, and accounts receivable). Among the ele-
ments not included in tangible assets are brands, copyrights, patents, fran-
chises, goodwill, and trademarks. To see how to calculate tangible-asset
value, see footnote † on p. 198.
===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
over the years as has the general market. Allied to the foregoing 
is the record of the published stock-market predictions of the 
brokerage houses, for there is strong evidence that their calculated
forecasts have been somewhat less reliable than the simple tossing
of a coin.
In writing this book we have tried to keep this basic pitfall of
investment in mind. The virtues of a simple portfolio policy have
been emphasized—the purchase of high-grade bonds plus a diver-
sified list of leading common stocks—which any investor can carry
out with a little expert assistance. The adventure beyond this safe
and sound territory has been presented as fraught with challeng-
ing difficulties, especially in the area of temperament. Before
attempting such a venture the investor should feel sure of himself
and of his advisers—particularly as to whether they have a clear
concept of the differences between investment and speculation and
between market price and underlying value.
A strong-minded approach to investment, firmly based on the
margin-of-safety principle, can yield handsome rewards. But a
decision to try for these emoluments rather than for the assured
fruits of defensive investment should not be made without much
self-examination.
A final retrospective thought. When the young author entered
Wall Street in June 1914 no one had any inkling of what the next
half-century had in store. (The stock market did not even suspect
that a World War was to break out in two months, and close down
the New York Stock Exchange.) Now, in 1972, we find ourselves the
richest and most powerful country on earth, but beset by all sorts
of major problems and more apprehensive than confident of the
future. Yet if we confine our attention to American investment
experience, there is some comfort to be gleaned from the last 57
years. Through all their vicissitudes and casualties, as earth-
shaking as they were unforeseen, it remained true that sound
investment principles produced generally sound results. We must
act on the assumption that they will continue to do so.
Note to the Reader: This book does not address itself to the overall
financial policy of savers and investors; it deals only with that 
portion of their funds which they are prepared to place in mar-
ketable (or redeemable) securities, that is, in bonds and stocks.
10 Introduction
===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Consequently we do not discuss such important media as savings
and time desposits, savings-and-loan-association accounts, life
insurance, annuities, and real-estate mortgages or equity owner-
ship. The reader should bear in mind that when he finds the word
“now,” or the equivalent, in the text, it refers to late 1971 or 
early 1972.
What This Book Expects to Accomplish 11
===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
COMMENTARY ON THE INTRODUCTION
If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost;
that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under
them.
—Henry David Thoreau, Walden
Notice that Graham announces from the start that this book will not
tell you how to beat the market. No truthful book can.
Instead, this book will teach you three powerful lessons:
• how you can minimize the odds of suffering irreversible losses;
• how you can maximize the chances of achieving sustainable gains;
• how you can control the self-defeating behavior that keeps most
investors from reaching their full potential.
Back in the boom years of the late 1990s, when technology stocks
seemed to be doubling in value every day, the notion that you could
lose almost all your money seemed absurd. But, by the end of 2002,
many of the dot-com and telecom stocks had lost 95% of their value
or more. Once you lose 95% of your money, you have to gain 1,900%
just to get back to where you started. 1 Taking a foolish risk can put
you so deep in the hole that it’s virtually impossible to get out. That’s
why Graham constantly emphasizes the importance of avoiding
losses—not just in Chapters 6, 14, and 20, but in the threads of warn-
ing that he has woven throughout his entire text.
But no matter how careful you are, the price of your investments
will go down from time to time. While no one can eliminate that risk,
12
1 To put this statement in perspective, consider how often you are likely to
buy a stock at $30 and be able to sell it at $600.
===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
Commentary on the Introduction 13
Graham will show you how to manage it—and how to get your fears
under control.
ARE YOU AN INTELLIGENT INVESTOR?
Now let’s answer a vitally important question. What exactly does Gra-
ham mean by an “intelligent” investor? Back in the first edition of this
book, Graham defines the term—and he makes it clear that this kind of
intelligence has nothing to do with IQ or SAT scores. 
It simply means
being patient, disciplined, and eager to learn; you must also be able to
harness your emotions and think for yourself. This kind of intelligence,
explains Graham, “is a trait more of the character than of the brain. ”2
There’s proof that high IQ and higher education are not enough to
make an investor intelligent. In 1998, Long-Term Capital Management
L.P., a hedge fund run by a battalion of mathematicians, computer 
scientists, and two Nobel Prize–winning economists, lost more than 
$2 billion in a matter of weeks on a huge bet that the bond market
would return to “normal. ” But the bond market kept right on becoming
more and more abnormal—and LTCM had borrowed so much money
that its collapse nearly capsized the global financial system.3
And back in the spring of 1720, Sir Isaac Newton owned shares in
the South Sea Company, the hottest stock in England. Sensing that
the market was getting out of hand, the great physicist muttered that
he “could calculate the motions of the heavenly bodies, but not the
madness of the people. ” Newton dumped his South Sea shares, pock-
eting a 100% profit totaling £7 ,000. But just months later, swept up in
the wild enthusiasm of the market, Newton jumped back in at a much
higher price—and lost £20,000 (or more than $3 million in today’s
money). For the rest of his life, he forbade anyone to speak the words
“South Sea” in his presence.4
2 Benjamin Graham, The Intelligent Investor (Harper & Row, 1949), p. 4.
3 A “hedge fund” is a pool of money, largely unregulated by the government,
invested aggressively for wealthy clients. For a superb telling of the LTCM
story, see Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed (Random House, 2000).
4 John Carswell, The South Sea Bubble (Cresset Press, London, 1960),
pp. 131, 199. Also see www.harvard-magazine.com/issues/mj99/damnd.
html.
===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
Sir Isaac Newton was one of the most intelligent people who ever
lived, as most of us would define intelligence. But, in Graham’s terms,
Newton was far from an intelligent investor. By letting the roar of the
crowd override his own judgment, the world’s greatest scientist acted
like a fool.
In short, if you’ve failed at investing so far, it’s not because you’re
stupid. It’s because, like Sir Isaac Newton, you haven’t developed the
emotional discipline that successful investing requires. In Chapter 8,
Graham describes how to enhance your intelligence by harnessing
your emotions and refusing to stoop to the market’s level of irrational-
ity. There you can master his lesson that being an intelligent investor is
more a matter of “character” than “brain. ”
A CHRONICLE OF CALAMITY
Now let’s take a moment to look at some of the major financial devel-
opments of the past few years:
1. The worst market crash since the Great Depression, with U.S.
stocks losing 50.2% of their value—or $7.4 trillion —between
March 2000 and October 2002.
2. Far deeper drops in the share prices of the hottest companies of
the 1990s, including AOL, Cisco, JDS Uniphase, Lucent, and
Qualcomm—plus the utter destruction of hundreds of Internet
stocks.
3. Accusations of massive financial fraud at some of the largest and
most respected corporations in America, including Enron, Tyco,
and Xerox.
4. The bankruptcies of such once-glistening companies as Con-
seco, Global Crossing, and WorldCom.
5. Allegations that accounting firms cooked the books, and even
destroyed records, to help their clients mislead the investing public.
6. Charges that top executives at leading companies siphoned off
hundreds of millions of dollars for their own personal gain.
7 . Proof that security analysts on Wall Street praised stocks publicly
but admitted privately that they were garbage.
8. A stock market that, even after its bloodcurdling decline, seems
overvalued by historical measures, suggesting to many experts
that stocks have further yet to fall.
14 Commentary on the Introduction
===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
9. A relentless decline in interest rates that has left investors with no
attractive alternative to stocks.
10. An investing environment bristling with the unpredictable menace
of global terrorism and war in the Middle East.
Much of this damage could have been (and was!) avoided by
investors who learned and lived by Graham’s principles. As Graham
puts it, “ while enthusiasm may be necess
ary for great accomplish-
ments elsewhere, on Wall Street it almost invariably leads to disaster. ”
By letting themselves get carried away—on Internet stocks, on big
“growth” stocks, on stocks as a whole—many people made the same
stupid mistakes as Sir Isaac Newton. They let other investors’ judg-
ments determine their own. They ignored Graham’s warning that “the
really dreadful losses” always occur after “the buyer forgot to ask
‘How much?’ ” Most painfully of all, by losing their self-control just
when they needed it the most, these people proved Graham’s asser-
tion that “the investor’s chief problem—and even his worst enemy—is
likely to be himself. ”
THE SURE THING THAT WASN’T
Many of those people got especially carried away on technology and
Internet stocks, believing the high-tech hype that this industry would
keep outgrowing every other for years to come, if not forever:
• In mid-1999, after earning a 117 .3% return in just the first five
months of the year, Monument Internet Fund portfolio manager
Alexander Cheung predicted that his fund would gain 50% a year
over the next three to five years and an annual average of 35%
“over the next 20 years. ”5
Commentary on the Introduction 15
5 Constance Loizos, “Q&A: Alex Cheung, ” InvestmentNews, May 17 , 1999,
p. 38. The highest 20-year return in mutual fund history was 25.8% per year,
achieved by the legendary Peter Lynch of Fidelity Magellan over the two
decades ending December 31, 1994. Lynch’s performance turned $10,000
into more than $982,000 in 20 years. Cheung was predicting that his fund
would turn $10,000 into more than $4 million over the same length of time.
Instead of regarding Cheung as ridiculously overoptimistic, investors threw
===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
• After his Amerindo Technology Fund rose an incredible 248.9%
in 1999, portfolio manager Alberto Vilar ridiculed anyone who
dared to doubt that the Internet was a perpetual moneymaking
machine: “If you’re out of this sector, you’re going to underper-
form. You’re in a horse and buggy, and I’m in a Porsche. You 
don’t like tenfold growth opportunities? Then go with someone
else. ”6
• In February 2000, hedge-fund manager James J. Cramer pro-
claimed that Internet-related companies “are the only ones worth
owning right now. ” These “winners of the new world, ” as he called
them, “are the only ones that are going higher consistently in
good days and bad. ” Cramer even took a potshot at Graham: “You
have to throw out all of the matrices and formulas and texts that
existed before the Web. . . . If we used any of what Graham and
Dodd teach us, we wouldn’t have a dime under management. ”7
All these so-called experts ignored Graham’s sober words of warn-
ing: “Obvious prospects for physical growth in a business do not
translate into obvious profits for investors. ” While it seems easy to
foresee which industry will grow the fastest, that foresight has no real
value if most other investors are already expecting the same thing. By
the time everyone decides that a given industry is “obviously” the best
16 Commentary on the Introduction
money at him, flinging more than $100 million into his fund over the next
year. A $10,000 investment in the Monument Internet Fund in May 1999
would have shrunk to roughly $2,000 by year-end 2002. (The Monument
fund no longer exists in its original form and is now known as Orbitex
Emerging Technology Fund.)
6 Lisa Reilly Cullen, “The Triple Digit Club, ” Money, December, 1999, p. 170.
If you had invested $10,000 in Vilar’s fund at the end of 1999, you would
have finished 2002 with just $1,195 left—one of the worst destructions of
wealth in the history of the mutual-fund industry.
7 See www.thestreet.com/funds/smarter/891820.html. Cramer’s favorite
stocks did not go “higher consistently in good days and bad. ” By year-end
2002, one of the 10 had already gone bankrupt, and a $10,000 investment
spread equally across Cramer’s picks would have lost 94%, leaving you
with a grand total of $597 .44. Perhaps Cramer meant that his stocks would
be “winners” not in “the new world, ” but in the world to come.
===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
one to invest in, the prices of its stocks have been bid up so high that
its future returns have nowhere to go but down.
For now at least, no one has the gall to try claiming that technology
will still be the world’s greatest growth industry. But make sure you
remember this: The people who now claim that the next “sure thing”
will be health care, or energy, or real estate, or gold, are no more likely
to be right in the end than the hypesters of high tech turned out to be.
THE SILVER LINING
If no price seemed too high for stocks in the 1990s, in 2003 we’ve
reached the point at which no price appears to be low enough. The
pendulum has swung, as Graham knew it always does, from irrational
exuberance to unjustifiable pessimism. In 2002, investors yanked $27
billion out of stock mutual funds, and a survey conducted by the Secu-
rities Industry Association found that one out of 10 investors had cut
back on stocks by at least 25%. The same people who were eager to
buy stocks in the late 1990s—when they were going up in price and,
therefore, becoming expensive—sold stocks as they went down in
price and, by definition, became cheaper.
As Graham shows so brilliantly in Chapter 8, this is exactly back-
wards. The intelligent investor realizes that stocks become more risky,
not less, as their prices rise—and less risky, not more, as their prices
fall. The intelligent investor dreads a bull market, since it makes stocks
more costly to buy. And conversely (so long as you keep enough cash
on hand to meet your spending needs), you should welcome a bear
market, since it puts stocks back on sale.8
So take heart: The death of the bull market is not the bad news
everyone believes it to be. Thanks to the decline in stock prices, now
is a considerably safer—and saner—time to be building wealth. Read
on, and let Graham show you how.
Commentary on the Introduction 17
8 The only exception to this rule is an investor in the advanced stage of
retirement, who may not be able to outlast a long bear market. Yet even an
elderly investor should not sell her stocks merely because they have gone
down in price; that approach not only turns her paper losses into real ones
but deprives her heirs of the potential to inherit those stocks at lower costs
for tax purposes.
===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
CHAPTER 1
Investment versus Speculation: Results to
Be Expected by the Intelligent Investor
This chapter will outline the viewpoints that will be set forth in
the remainder of the book. In particular we wish to develop at the
outset our concept of appropriate portfolio policy for the individ-
ual, nonprofessional investor.
Investment versus Speculation
What do we mean by “investor”? Throughout this book the
term will be used in contradistinction to “speculator.” As far back
as 1934, in our textbook Security Analysis,1 we attempted a precise
formulation of the difference between the two, as follows: 
“An
investment operation is one which, upon thorough analysis prom-
ises safety of principal and an adequate return. Operations not
meeting these requirements are speculative.”
While we have clung tenaciously to this definition over the
ensuing 38 years, it is worthwhile noting the radical changes that
have occurred in the use of the term “investor” during this period.
After the great market decline of 1929–1932 all common stocks
were widely regarded as speculative by nature. (A leading author-
ity stated flatly that only bonds could be bought for investment. 2)
Thus we had then to defend our definition against the charge that
it gave too wide scope to the concept of investment.
Now our concern is of the opposite sort. We must prevent our
readers from accepting the common jargon which applies the term
“investor” to anybody and everybody in the stock market. In our
last edition we cited the following headline of a front-page article
of our leading financial journal in June 1962:
18
===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
SMALL INVESTORS BEARISH, THEY ARE SELLING ODD-LOTS SHORT
In October 1970 the same journal had an editorial critical of what it
called “reckless investors,” who this time were rushing in on the
buying side.
These quotations well illustrate the confusion that has been
dominant for many years in the use of the words investment and
speculation. Think of our suggested definition of investment given
above, and compare it with the sale of a few shares of stock by an
inexperienced member of the public, who does not even own what
he is selling, and has some largely emotional conviction that he
will be able to buy them back at a much lower price. (It is not irrel-
evant to point out that when the 1962 article appeared the market
had already experienced a decline of major size, and was now get-
ting ready for an even greater upswing. It was about as poor a time
as possible for selling short.) In a more general sense, the later-used
phrase “reckless investors” could be regarded as a laughable con-
tradiction in terms—something like “spendthrift misers”—were
this misuse of language not so mischievous.
The newspaper employed the word “investor” in these
instances because, in the easy language of Wall Street, everyone
who buys or sells a security has become an investor, regardless of
what he buys, or for what purpose, or at what price, or whether for
cash or on margin. Compare this with the attitude of the public
toward common stocks in 1948, when over 90% of those queried
expressed themselves as opposed to the purchase of common
stocks.3 About half gave as their reason “not safe, a gamble,” and
about half, the reason “not familiar with.”* It is indeed ironical
Investment versus Speculation 19
* The survey Graham cites was conducted for the Fed by the University of
Michigan and was published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin, July, 1948.
People were asked, “Suppose a man decides not to spend his money. He
can either put it in a bank or in bonds or he can invest it. What do you think
would be the wisest thing for him to do with the money nowadays—put it in
the bank, buy savings bonds with it, invest it in real estate, or buy common
stock with it?” Only 4% thought common stock would offer a “satisfactory”
return; 26% considered it “not safe” or a “gamble. ” From 1949 through
1958, the stock market earned one of its highest 10-year returns in history,
===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
(though not surprising) that common-stock purchases of all kinds
were quite generally regarded as highly speculative or risky at a
time when they were selling on a most attractive basis, and due
soon to begin their greatest advance in history; conversely the very
fact they had advanced to what were undoubtedly dangerous lev-
els as judged by past experience later transformed them into “invest-
ments,” and the entire stock-buying public into “investors.”
The distinction between investment and speculation in common
stocks has always been a useful one and its disappearance is a
cause for concern. We have often said that Wall Street as an institu-
tion would be well advised to reinstate this distinction and to
emphasize it in all its dealings with the public. Otherwise the stock
exchanges may some day be blamed for heavy speculative losses,
which those who suffered them had not been properly warned
against. Ironically, once more, much of the recent financial embar-
rassment of some stock-exchange firms seems to have come from
the inclusion of speculative common stocks in their own capital
funds. We trust that the reader of this book will gain a reasonably
clear idea of the risks that are inherent in common-stock commit-
ments—risks which are inseparable from the opportunities of
profit that they offer, and both of which must be allowed for in the
investor’s calculations.
What we have just said indicates that there may no longer be
such a thing as a simon-pure investment policy comprising repre-
sentative common stocks—in the sense that one can always wait to
buy them at a price that involves no risk of a market or “quota-
tional” loss large enough to be disquieting. In most periods the
investor must recognize the existence of a speculative factor in his
common-stock holdings. It is his task to keep this component
within minor limits, and to be prepared financially and psycholog-
ically for adverse results that may be of short or long duration.
Two paragraphs should be added about stock speculation per
se, as distinguished from the speculative component now inherent
20 The Intelligent Investor
averaging 18.7% annually. In a fascinating echo of that early Fed survey, a
poll conducted by BusinessWeek at year-end 2002 found that only 24% of
investors were willing to invest more in their mutual funds or stock portfolios,
down from 47% just three years earlier.
===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
in most representative common stocks. Outright speculation is 
neither illegal, immoral, nor (for most people) fattening to the
pocketbook. More than that, some speculation is necessary and
unavoidable, for in many common-stock situations there are sub-
stantial possibilities of both profit and loss, and the risks therein
must be assumed by someone.* There is intelligent speculation as
there is intelligent investing. But there are many ways in which
speculation may be unintelligent. Of these the foremost are: (1)
speculating when you think you are investing; (2) speculating seri-
ously instead of as a pastime, when you lack proper knowledge
and skill for it; and (3) risking more money in speculation than you
can afford to lose.
In our conservative view every nonprofessional who operates
on margin† should recognize that he is ipso facto speculating, and it
is his broker’s duty so to advise him. And everyone who buys a
so-called “hot” common-stock issue, or makes a purchase in any
way similar thereto, is either speculating or gambling. Speculation
is always fascinating, and it can be a lot of fun while you are ahead
of the game. If you want to try your luck at it, put aside a portion—
the smaller the better—of your capital in a separate fund for this
purpose. Never add more money to this account just because the
Investment versus Speculation 21
* Speculation is beneficial on two levels: First, without speculation, untested
new companies (like Amazon.com or, in earlier times, the Edison Electric
Light Co.) would never be able to raise the necessary capital for expansion.
The alluring, long-shot chance of a huge gain is the grease that lubricates
the machinery of innovation. Secondly, risk is exchanged (but never elimi-
nated) every time a stock is bought or sold. The buyer purchases the primary
risk that this stock may go down. Meanwhile, the seller still retains a residual
risk—the chance that the stock he just sold may go up!
† A margin account enables you to buy stocks using money you borrow
from the brokerage firm. By investing with borrowed money, you make more
when your stocks go up—but you can be wiped out when they go down. The
collateral for the loan is the value of the investments in your account—so you
must put up more money if that value falls below the amount you borrowed.
For more information about margin accounts, see www.sec.gov/ investor/
pubs/margin.htm, www.sia.com/publications/pdf/MarginsA .pdf, and www.
nyse.com/pdfs/2001_factbook_09.pdf.
===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
market has gone up and profits are rolling in. (That’s the time to
think of taking money out of your speculative fund.) Never mingle
your speculative and investment operations in the same account,
nor in any part of your thinking.
Results to Be Expected by the Defensive Investor
We have already defined the defensive investor as one inter-
ested chiefly in safety plus freedom from bother. In general what
course should he follow and what return can he expect under
“average normal conditions”—if such conditions really exist? To
answer these questions we shall consider first what we wrote on
the subject seven years ago, next what significant changes have
occurred since then in the underlying factors governing the
investor’s expectable return, and finally what he should do and
what he should expect under present-day (early 1972) conditions.
1. What We Said Six Years Ago
We recommended that the investor divide his holdings between
high-grade bonds and leading common stocks; that the proportion
held in bonds be never less than 25% or more than 75%, with the
converse being necessarily true for the common-stock component;
that his simplest choice would be to maintain a 50–50 proportion
between the two, with adjustments to restore the equality when
market developments had disturbed it by as much as, say, 5%. As
an alternative policy he might choose to reduce his common-stock
component to 25% “if he felt the market was dangerously high,”
and conversely to advance it toward the maximum of 75% “if he
felt that a decline in stock prices was making them increasingly
attractive.”
In 1965 the investor could obtain about 4 1⁄2% on high-grade tax-
able bonds and 3 1⁄4% on good tax-free bonds. The dividend return
on leading common stocks (with the DJIA at 892) was only about
3.2%. This fact, and others, suggested caution. We implied that “at
normal levels of the market” the investor should be able to obtain
an initial dividend return of between 3 1⁄2% and 4 1⁄2% on his stock
purchases, to which should be added a steady increase in underly-
ing value (and in the “normal market price”) of a representative
22 The Intelligent Investor