===== SOURCE CHAPTER 1 | PDF PAGES 32-60 =====

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
CHAPTER 1
Investment versus Speculation: Results to
Be Expected by the Intelligent Investor
This chapter will outline the viewpoints that will be set forth in
the remainder of the book. In particular we wish to develop at the
outset our concept of appropriate portfolio policy for the individ-
ual, nonprofessional investor.
Investment versus Speculation
What do we mean by “investor”? Throughout this book the
term will be used in contradistinction to “speculator.” As far back
as 1934, in our textbook Security Analysis,1 we attempted a precise
formulation of the difference between the two, as follows: 
“An
investment operation is one which, upon thorough analysis prom-
ises safety of principal and an adequate return. Operations not
meeting these requirements are speculative.”
While we have clung tenaciously to this definition over the
ensuing 38 years, it is worthwhile noting the radical changes that
have occurred in the use of the term “investor” during this period.
After the great market decline of 1929–1932 all common stocks
were widely regarded as speculative by nature. (A leading author-
ity stated flatly that only bonds could be bought for investment. 2)
Thus we had then to defend our definition against the charge that
it gave too wide scope to the concept of investment.
Now our concern is of the opposite sort. We must prevent our
readers from accepting the common jargon which applies the term
“investor” to anybody and everybody in the stock market. In our
last edition we cited the following headline of a front-page article
of our leading financial journal in June 1962:
18

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
SMALL INVESTORS BEARISH, THEY ARE SELLING ODD-LOTS SHORT
In October 1970 the same journal had an editorial critical of what it
called “reckless investors,” who this time were rushing in on the
buying side.
These quotations well illustrate the confusion that has been
dominant for many years in the use of the words investment and
speculation. Think of our suggested definition of investment given
above, and compare it with the sale of a few shares of stock by an
inexperienced member of the public, who does not even own what
he is selling, and has some largely emotional conviction that he
will be able to buy them back at a much lower price. (It is not irrel-
evant to point out that when the 1962 article appeared the market
had already experienced a decline of major size, and was now get-
ting ready for an even greater upswing. It was about as poor a time
as possible for selling short.) In a more general sense, the later-used
phrase “reckless investors” could be regarded as a laughable con-
tradiction in terms—something like “spendthrift misers”—were
this misuse of language not so mischievous.
The newspaper employed the word “investor” in these
instances because, in the easy language of Wall Street, everyone
who buys or sells a security has become an investor, regardless of
what he buys, or for what purpose, or at what price, or whether for
cash or on margin. Compare this with the attitude of the public
toward common stocks in 1948, when over 90% of those queried
expressed themselves as opposed to the purchase of common
stocks.3 About half gave as their reason “not safe, a gamble,” and
about half, the reason “not familiar with.”* It is indeed ironical
Investment versus Speculation 19
* The survey Graham cites was conducted for the Fed by the University of
Michigan and was published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin, July, 1948.
People were asked, “Suppose a man decides not to spend his money. He
can either put it in a bank or in bonds or he can invest it. What do you think
would be the wisest thing for him to do with the money nowadays—put it in
the bank, buy savings bonds with it, invest it in real estate, or buy common
stock with it?” Only 4% thought common stock would offer a “satisfactory”
return; 26% considered it “not safe” or a “gamble. ” From 1949 through
1958, the stock market earned one of its highest 10-year returns in history,

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
(though not surprising) that common-stock purchases of all kinds
were quite generally regarded as highly speculative or risky at a
time when they were selling on a most attractive basis, and due
soon to begin their greatest advance in history; conversely the very
fact they had advanced to what were undoubtedly dangerous lev-
els as judged by past experience later transformed them into “invest-
ments,” and the entire stock-buying public into “investors.”
The distinction between investment and speculation in common
stocks has always been a useful one and its disappearance is a
cause for concern. We have often said that Wall Street as an institu-
tion would be well advised to reinstate this distinction and to
emphasize it in all its dealings with the public. Otherwise the stock
exchanges may some day be blamed for heavy speculative losses,
which those who suffered them had not been properly warned
against. Ironically, once more, much of the recent financial embar-
rassment of some stock-exchange firms seems to have come from
the inclusion of speculative common stocks in their own capital
funds. We trust that the reader of this book will gain a reasonably
clear idea of the risks that are inherent in common-stock commit-
ments—risks which are inseparable from the opportunities of
profit that they offer, and both of which must be allowed for in the
investor’s calculations.
What we have just said indicates that there may no longer be
such a thing as a simon-pure investment policy comprising repre-
sentative common stocks—in the sense that one can always wait to
buy them at a price that involves no risk of a market or “quota-
tional” loss large enough to be disquieting. In most periods the
investor must recognize the existence of a speculative factor in his
common-stock holdings. It is his task to keep this component
within minor limits, and to be prepared financially and psycholog-
ically for adverse results that may be of short or long duration.
Two paragraphs should be added about stock speculation per
se, as distinguished from the speculative component now inherent
20 The Intelligent Investor
averaging 18.7% annually. In a fascinating echo of that early Fed survey, a
poll conducted by BusinessWeek at year-end 2002 found that only 24% of
investors were willing to invest more in their mutual funds or stock portfolios,
down from 47% just three years earlier.

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
in most representative common stocks. Outright speculation is 
neither illegal, immoral, nor (for most people) fattening to the
pocketbook. More than that, some speculation is necessary and
unavoidable, for in many common-stock situations there are sub-
stantial possibilities of both profit and loss, and the risks therein
must be assumed by someone.* There is intelligent speculation as
there is intelligent investing. But there are many ways in which
speculation may be unintelligent. Of these the foremost are: (1)
speculating when you think you are investing; (2) speculating seri-
ously instead of as a pastime, when you lack proper knowledge
and skill for it; and (3) risking more money in speculation than you
can afford to lose.
In our conservative view every nonprofessional who operates
on margin† should recognize that he is ipso facto speculating, and it
is his broker’s duty so to advise him. And everyone who buys a
so-called “hot” common-stock issue, or makes a purchase in any
way similar thereto, is either speculating or gambling. Speculation
is always fascinating, and it can be a lot of fun while you are ahead
of the game. If you want to try your luck at it, put aside a portion—
the smaller the better—of your capital in a separate fund for this
purpose. Never add more money to this account just because the
Investment versus Speculation 21
* Speculation is beneficial on two levels: First, without speculation, untested
new companies (like Amazon.com or, in earlier times, the Edison Electric
Light Co.) would never be able to raise the necessary capital for expansion.
The alluring, long-shot chance of a huge gain is the grease that lubricates
the machinery of innovation. Secondly, risk is exchanged (but never elimi-
nated) every time a stock is bought or sold. The buyer purchases the primary
risk that this stock may go down. Meanwhile, the seller still retains a residual
risk—the chance that the stock he just sold may go up!
† A margin account enables you to buy stocks using money you borrow
from the brokerage firm. By investing with borrowed money, you make more
when your stocks go up—but you can be wiped out when they go down. The
collateral for the loan is the value of the investments in your account—so you
must put up more money if that value falls below the amount you borrowed.
For more information about margin accounts, see www.sec.gov/ investor/
pubs/margin.htm, www.sia.com/publications/pdf/MarginsA .pdf, and www.
nyse.com/pdfs/2001_factbook_09.pdf.

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
market has gone up and profits are rolling in. (That’s the time to
think of taking money out of your speculative fund.) Never mingle
your speculative and investment operations in the same account,
nor in any part of your thinking.
Results to Be Expected by the Defensive Investor
We have already defined the defensive investor as one inter-
ested chiefly in safety plus freedom from bother. In general what
course should he follow and what return can he expect under
“average normal conditions”—if such conditions really exist? To
answer these questions we shall consider first what we wrote on
the subject seven years ago, next what significant changes have
occurred since then in the underlying factors governing the
investor’s expectable return, and finally what he should do and
what he should expect under present-day (early 1972) conditions.
1. What We Said Six Years Ago
We recommended that the investor divide his holdings between
high-grade bonds and leading common stocks; that the proportion
held in bonds be never less than 25% or more than 75%, with the
converse being necessarily true for the common-stock component;
that his simplest choice would be to maintain a 50–50 proportion
between the two, with adjustments to restore the equality when
market developments had disturbed it by as much as, say, 5%. As
an alternative policy he might choose to reduce his common-stock
component to 25% “if he felt the market was dangerously high,”
and conversely to advance it toward the maximum of 75% “if he
felt that a decline in stock prices was making them increasingly
attractive.”
In 1965 the investor could obtain about 4 1⁄2% on high-grade tax-
able bonds and 3 1⁄4% on good tax-free bonds. The dividend return
on leading common stocks (with the DJIA at 892) was only about
3.2%. This fact, and others, suggested caution. We implied that “at
normal levels of the market” the investor should be able to obtain
an initial dividend return of between 3 1⁄2% and 4 1⁄2% on his stock
purchases, to which should be added a steady increase in underly-
ing value (and in the “normal market price”) of a representative
22 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
stock list of about the same amount, giving a return from divi-
dends and appreciation combined of about 7 1⁄2% per year. The half
and half division between bonds and stocks would yield about 6%
before income tax. We added that the stock component should
carry a fair degree of protection against a loss of purchasing power
caused by large-scale inflation.
It should be pointed out that the above arithmetic indicated
expectation of a much lower rate of advance in the stock market
than had been realized between 1949 and 1964. That rate had aver-
aged a good deal better than 10% for listed stocks as a whole, and it
was quite generally regarded as a sort of guarantee that similarly
satisfactory results could be counted on in the future. Few people
were willing to consider seriously the possibility that the high rate
of advance in the past means that stock prices are “now too high,”
and hence that “the wonderful results since 1949 would imply not
very good but bad results for the future.”4
2. What Has Happened Since 1964
The major change since 1964 has been the rise in interest rates on
first-grade bonds to record high levels, although there has since
been a considerable recovery from the lowest prices of 1970. The
obtainable return on good corporate issues is now about 7 1⁄2% and
even more against 4 1⁄2% in 1964. In the meantime the dividend
return on DJIA-type stocks had a fair advance also during the mar-
ket decline of 1969–70, but as we write (with “the Dow” at 900) it is
less than 3.5% against 3.2% at the end of 1964. The change in going
interest rates produced a maximum decline of about 38% in the
market price of medium-term (say 20-year) bonds during this
period.
There is a paradoxical aspect to these developments. In 1964 we
discussed at length the possibility that the price of stocks might be
too high and subject ultimately to a serious decline; but we did not
consider specifically the possibility that the same might happen to
the price of high-grade bonds. (Neither did anyone else that we
know of.) We did warn (on p. 90) that “a long-term bond may vary
widely in price in response to changes in interest rates.” In the light
of what has since happened we think that this warning—with
attendant examples—was insufficiently stressed. For the fact is that
Investment versus Speculation 23

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
if the investor had a given sum in the DJIA at its closing price of
874 in 1964 he would have had a small profit thereon in late 1971;
even at the lowest level (631) in 1970 his indicated loss would have
been less than that shown on good long-term bonds. On the other
hand, if he had confined his bond-type investments to U.S. savings
bonds, short-term corporate issues, or savings accounts, he would
have had no loss in market value of his principal during this period
and he would have enjoyed a higher income return than was
offered by good stocks. It turned out, therefore, that true “cash
equivalents” proved to be better investments in 1964 than common
stocks—in spite of the inflation experience that in theory should
have favored stocks over cash. The decline in quoted principal
value of good longer-term bonds was due to developments in the
money market, an abstruse area which ordinarily does not have an
important bearing on the investment policy of individuals.
This is just another of an endless series of experiences over time
that have demonstrated that the future of security prices is never
predictable.* Almost always bonds have fluctuated much less than
stock prices, and investors generally could buy good bonds of any
maturity without having to worry about changes in their market
value. There were a few exceptions to this rule, and the period after
1964 proved to be one of them. We shall have more to say about
change in bond prices in a later chapter.
3. Expectations and Policy in Late 1971 and Early 1972
Toward the end of 1971 it was possible to obtain 8% taxable
interest on good medium-term corporate bonds, and 5.7% tax-free
on good state or municipal securities. In the shorter-term field the
investor could realize about 6% on U.S. government issues due in
five years. In the latter case the buyer need not be concerned about
24 The Intelligent Investor
* Read Graham’s sentence again, and note what this greatest of investing 
experts is saying: The future of security prices is never predictable. And as
you read ahead in the book, notice how everything else Graham tells you is
designed to help you grapple with that truth. Since you cannot predict the
behavior of the markets, you must learn how to predict and control your own
behavior.

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
a possible loss in market value, since he is sure of full repayment,
including the 6% interest return, at the end of a comparatively
short holding period. The DJIA at its recurrent price level of 900 in
1971 yields only 3.5%.
Let us assume that now, as in the past, the basic policy decision
to be made is how to divide the fund between high-grade bonds
(or other so-called “cash equivalents”) and leading DJIA-type
stocks. What course should the investor follow under present con-
ditions, if we have no strong reason to predict either a significant
upward or a significant downward movement for some time in the
future? First let us point out that if there is no serious adverse
change, the defensive investor should be able to count on the cur-
rent 3.5% dividend return on his stocks and also on an average
annual appreciation of about 4%. As we shall explain later this
appreciation is based essentially on the reinvestment by the vari-
ous companies of a corresponding amount annually out of undis-
tributed profits. On a before-tax basis the combined return of his
stocks would then average, say, 7.5%, somewhat less than his inter-
est on high-grade bonds.* On an after-tax basis the average return
on stocks would work out at some 5.3%. 5 This would be about the
same as is now obtainable on good tax-free medium-term bonds.
These expectations are much less favorable for stocks against
bonds than they were in our 1964 analysis. (That conclusion fol-
lows inevitably from the basic fact that bond yields have gone up
much more than stock yields since 1964.) We must never lose sight
Investment versus Speculation 25
* How well did Graham’s forecast pan out? At first blush, it seems, very
well: From the beginning of 1972 through the end of 1981, stocks earned
an annual average return of 6.5%. (Graham did not specify the time period
for his forecast, but it’s plausible to assume that he was thinking of a 10-
year time horizon.) However, inflation raged at 8.6% annually over this
period, eating up the entire gain that stocks produced. In this section of his
chapter, Graham is summarizing what is known as the “Gordon equation, ”
which essentially holds that the stock market’s future return is the sum of the
current dividend yield plus expected earnings growth. With a dividend yield
of just under 2% in early 2003, and long-term earnings growth of around
2%, plus inflation at a bit over 2%, a future average annual return of roughly
6% is plausible. (See the commentary on Chapter 3.)

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
of the fact that the interest and principal payments on good bonds
are much better protected and therefore more certain than the divi-
dends and price appreciation on stocks. Consequently we are
forced to the conclusion that now, toward the end of 1971, bond
investment appears clearly preferable to stock investment. If we
could be sure that this conclusion is right we would have to advise
the defensive investor to put all his money in bonds and none in
common stocks until the current yield relationship changes signifi-
cantly in favor of stocks.
But of course we cannot be certain that bonds will work out bet-
ter than stocks from today’s levels. The reader will immediately
think of the inflation factor as a potent reason on the other side. In
the next chapter we shall argue that our considerable experience
with inflation in the United States during this century would not
support the choice of stocks against bonds at present differentials
in yield. But there is always the possibility—though we consider it
remote—of an accelerating inflation, which in one way or another
would have to make stock equities preferable to bonds payable in a
fixed amount of dollars.* There is the alternative possibility—
which we also consider highly unlikely—that American business
will become so profitable, without stepped-up inflation, as to jus-
tify a large increase in common-stock values in the next few years.
Finally, there is the more familiar possibility that we shall witness
another great speculative rise in the stock market without a real
justification in the underlying values. Any of these reasons, and
perhaps others we haven’t thought of, might cause the investor to
regret a 100% concentration on bonds even at their more favorable
yield levels.
Hence, after this foreshortened discussion of the major consider-
ations, we once again enunciate the same basic compromise policy
26 The Intelligent Investor
* Since 1997 , when Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (or TIPS) were
introduced, stocks have no longer been the automatically superior choice
for investors who expect inflation to increase. TIPS, unlike other bonds, rise
in value if the Consumer Price Index goes up, effectively immunizing the
investor against losing money after inflation. Stocks carry no such guarantee
and, in fact, are a relatively poor hedge against high rates of inflation. (For
more details, see the commentary to Chapter 2.)

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
for defensive investors—namely that at all times they have a signif-
icant part of their funds in bond-type holdings and a significant
part also in equities. It is still true that they may choose between
maintaining a simple 50–50 division between the two components
or a ratio, dependent on their judgment, varying between a mini-
mum of 25% and a maximum of 75% of either. We shall give our
more detailed view of these alternative policies in a later chapter.
Since at present the overall return envisaged from common stocks
is nearly the same as that from bonds, the presently expectable
return (including growth of stock values) for the investor would
change little regardless of how he divides his fund between the
two components. As calculated above, the aggregate return from
both parts should be about 7.8% before taxes or 5.5% on a tax-free
(or estimated tax-paid) basis. A return of this order is appreciably
higher than that realized by the typical conservative investor over
most of the long-term past. It may not seem attractive in relation to
the 14%, or so, return shown by common stocks during the 20
years of the predominantly bull market after 1949. But it should be
remembered that between 1949 and 1969 the price of the DJIA had
advanced more than fivefold while its earnings and dividends had
about doubled. Hence the greater part of the impressive market
record for that period was based on a change in investors’ and
speculators’ attitudes rather than in underlying corporate values.
To that extent it might well be called a “bootstrap operation.”
In discussing the common-stock portfolio of the defensive
investor, we have spoken only of leading issues of the type
included in the 30 components of the Dow Jones Industrial Aver-
age. We have done this for convenience, and not to imply that these
30 issues alone are suitable for purchase by him. Actually, there are
many other companies of quality equal to or excelling the average
of the Dow Jones list; these would include a host of public utilities
(which have a separate Dow Jones average to represent them).* But
Investment versus Speculation 27
* Today, the most widely available alternatives to the Dow Jones Industrial
Average are the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index (the “S & P”) and the
Wilshire 5000 index. The S & P focuses on 500 large, well-known compa-
nies that make up roughly 70% of the total value of the U.S. equity market.
The Wilshire 5000 follows the returns of nearly every significant, publicly

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
the major point here is that the defensive investor’s overall results
are not likely to be decisively different from one diversified or rep-
resentative list than from another, or—more accurately—that nei-
ther he nor his advisers could predict with certainty whatever
differences would ultimately develop. It is true that the art of skill-
ful or shrewd investment is supposed to lie particularly in the
selection of issues that will give better results than the general mar-
ket. For reasons to be developed elsewhere we are skeptical of the
ability of defensive investors generally to get better than average
results—which in fact would mean to beat their own overall per-
formance.* (Our skepticism extends to the management of large
funds by experts.)
Let us illustrate our point by an example that at first may seem
to prove the opposite. Between December 1960 and December 1970
the DJIA advanced from 616 to 839, or 36%. But in the same period
the much larger Standard & Poor’s weighted index of 500 stocks
rose from 58.11 to 92.15, or 58%. Obviously the second group had
proved a better “buy” than the first. But who would have been so
rash as to predict in 1960 that what seemed like a miscellaneous
assortment of all sorts of common stocks would definitely outper-
form the aristocratic “thirty tyrants” of the Dow? All this proves,
we insist, that only rarely can one make dependable predictions
about price changes, absolute or relative.
We shall repeat here without apology—for the warning cannot
be given too often—that the investor cannot hope for better than
average results by buying new offerings, or “hot” issues of any
sort, meaning thereby those recommended for a quick profit.† The
contrary is almost certain to be true in the long run. 
The defensive
investor must confine himself to the shares of important companies
with a long record of profitable operations and in strong financial
condition. (Any security analyst worth his salt could make up such
28 The Intelligent Investor
traded stock in America, roughly 6,700 in all; but, since the largest compa-
nies account for most of the total value of the index, the return of the
Wilshire 5000 is usually quite similar to that of the S & P 500. Several low-
cost mutual funds enable investors to hold the stocks in these indexes as a
single, convenient portfolio. (See Chapter 9.)
* See pp. 363–366 and pp. 376–380.
† For greater detail, see Chapter 6.

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
a list.) Aggressive investors may buy other types of common
stocks, but they should be on a definitely attractive basis as estab-
lished by intelligent analysis.
To conclude this section, let us mention briefly three supplemen-
tary concepts or practices for the defensive investor. The first is the
purchase of the shares of well-established investment funds as an
alternative to creating his own common-stock portfolio. He might
also utilize one of the “common trust funds,” or “commingled
funds,” operated by trust companies and banks in many states; or,
if his funds are substantial, use the services of a recognized invest-
ment-counsel firm. This will give him professional administration
of his investment program along standard lines. The third is the
device of “dollar-cost averaging,” which means simply that the
practitioner invests in common stocks the same number of dollars
each month or each quarter. In this way he buys more shares when
the market is low than when it is high, and he is likely to end up
with a satisfactory overall price for all his holdings. Strictly speak-
ing, this method is an application of a broader approach known as
“formula investing.” The latter was already alluded to in our sug-
gestion that the investor may vary his holdings of common stocks
between the 25% minimum and the 75% maximum, in inverse rela-
tionship to the action of the market. These ideas have merit for the
defensive investor, and they will be discussed more amply in later
chapters.*
Results to Be Expected by the Aggressive Investor
Our enterprising security buyer, of course, will desire and
expect to attain better overall results than his defensive or passive
companion. But first he must make sure that his results will not be
worse. It is no difficult trick to bring a great deal of energy, study,
and native ability into Wall Street and to end up with losses instead
of profits. These virtues, if channeled in the wrong directions,
become indistinguishable from handicaps. Thus it is most essential
that the enterprising investor start with a clear conception as to
Investment versus Speculation 29
* For more advice on “well-established investment funds, ” see Chapter 9.
“Professional administration” by “a recognized investment-counsel firm” is
discussed in Chapter 10. “Dollar-cost averaging” is explained in Chapter 5.

===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
which courses of action offer reasonable chances of success and
which do not.
First let us consider several ways in which investors and specu-
lators generally have endeavored to obtain better than average
results. These include:
1. Trading in the market. This usually means buying stocks
when the market has been advancing and selling them after it has
turned downward. The stocks selected are likely to be among those
which have been “behaving” better than the market average. A
small number of professionals frequently engage in short selling.
Here they will sell issues they do not own but borrow through the
established mechanism of the stock exchanges. Their object is to
benefit from a subsequent decline in the price of these issues, by
buying them back at a price lower than they sold them for. (As our
quotation from the Wall Street Journal on p. 19 indicates, even
“small investors”—perish the term!—sometimes try their unskilled
hand at short selling.)
2. Short-term selectivity.This means buying stocks of compa-
nies which are reporting or expected to report increased earnings,
or for which some other favorable development is anticipated.
3. Long-term selectivity . Here the usual emphasis is on an
excellent record of past growth, which is considered likely to con-
tinue in the future. In some cases also the “investor” may choose
companies which have not yet shown impressive results, but are
expected to establish a high earning power later. (Such companies
belong frequently in some technological area—e.g., computers,
drugs, electronics—and they often are developing new processes
or products that are deemed to be especially promising.)
We have already expressed a negative view about the investor’s
overall chances of success in these areas of activity. The first we
have ruled out, on both theoretical and realistic grounds, from the
domain of investment. Stock trading is not an operation “which, on
thorough analysis, offers safety of principal and a satisfactory
return.” More will be said on stock trading in a later chapter.*
30 The Intelligent Investor
* See Chapter 8.

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
In his endeavor to select the most promising stocks either for the
near term or the longer future, the investor faces obstacles of two
kinds—the first stemming from human fallibility and the second
from the nature of his competition. He may be wrong in his esti-
mate of the future; or even if he is right, the current market price
may already fully reflect what he is anticipating. In the area of
near-term selectivity, the current year’s results of the company are
generally common property on Wall Street; next year’s results, to
the extent they are predictable, are already being carefully consid-
ered. Hence the investor who selects issues chiefly on the basis of
this year’s superior results, or on what he is told he may expect for
next year, is likely to find that others have done the same thing for
the same reason.
In choosing stocks for their long-term prospects, the investor’s
handicaps are basically the same. The possibility of outright error
in the prediction—which we illustrated by our airlines example on
p. 6—is no doubt greater than when dealing with near-term earn-
ings. Because the experts frequently go astray in such forecasts, it is
theoretically possible for an investor to benefit greatly by making
correct predictions when Wall Street as a whole is making incorrect
ones. But that is only theoretical. How many enterprising investors
could count on having the acumen or prophetic gift to beat the pro-
fessional analysts at their favorite game of estimating long-term
future earnings?
We are thus led to the following logical if disconcerting conclu-
sion: To enjoy a reasonable chance for continued better than average
results, the investor must follow policies which are (1) inherently
sound and promising, and (2) not popular on Wall Street.
Are there any such policies available for the enterprising
investor? In theory once again, the answer should be yes; and there
are broad reasons to think that the answer should be affirmative in
practice as well. Everyone knows that speculative stock move-
ments are carried too far in both directions, frequently in the gen-
eral market and at all times in at least some of the individual
issues. Furthermore, a common stock may be undervalued because
of lack of interest or unjustified popular prejudice. We can go fur-
ther and assert that in an astonishingly large proportion of the
trading in common stocks, those engaged therein don’t appear to
know—in polite terms—one part of their anatomy from another. In
this book we shall point out numerous examples of (past) dis-
Investment versus Speculation 31

===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
crepancies between price and value. Thus it seems that any intelli-
gent person, with a good head for figures, should have a veritable
picnic on Wall Street, battening off other people’s foolishness. So it
seems, but somehow it doesn’t work out that simply. Buying a neg-
lected and therefore undervalued issue for profit generally proves
a protracted and patience-trying experience. And selling short a
too popular and therefore overvalued issue is apt to be a test not
only of one’s courage and stamina but also of the depth of one’s
pocketbook.* The principle is sound, its successful application is
not impossible, but it is distinctly not an easy art to master.
There is also a fairly wide group of “special situations,” which
over many years could be counted on to bring a nice annual return
of 20% or better, with a minimum of overall risk to those who knew
their way around in this field. They include intersecurity arbi-
trages, payouts or workouts in liquidations, protected hedges of
certain kinds. The most typical case is a projected merger or acqui-
sition which offers a substantially higher value for certain shares
than their price on the date of the announcement. The number of
such deals increased greatly in recent years, and it should have
been a highly profitable period for the cognoscenti. But with the
multiplication of merger announcements came a multiplication of
obstacles to mergers and of deals that didn’t go through; quite a
few individual losses were thus realized in these once-reliable
operations. Perhaps, too, the overall rate of profit was diminished
by too much competition.†
32 The Intelligent Investor
* In “selling short” (or “shorting”) a stock, you make a bet that its share 
price will go down, not up. Shorting is a three-step process: First, you bor-
row shares from someone who owns them; then you immediately sell the
borrowed shares; finally, you replace them with shares you buy later. If the
stock drops, you will be able to buy your replacement shares at a lower
price. The difference between the price at which you sold your borrowed
shares and the price you paid for the replacement shares is your gross profit
(reduced by dividend or interest charges, along with brokerage costs). How-
ever, if the stock goes up in price instead of down, your potential loss is
unlimited—making short sales unacceptably speculative for most individual
investors.
† In the late 1980s, as hostile corporate takeovers and leveraged buyouts
multiplied, Wall Street set up institutional arbitrage desks to profit from any

===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
The lessened profitability of these special situations appears one
manifestation of a kind of self-destructive process—akin to the law
of diminishing returns—which has developed during the lifetime
of this book. In 1949 we could present a study of stock-market fluc-
tuations over the preceding 75 years, which supported a formula—
based on earnings and current interest rates—for determining a
level to buy the DJIA below its “central” or “intrinsic” value, 
and to sell out above such value. It was an application of the gov-
erning maxim of the Rothschilds: “Buy cheap and sell dear.”* And
it had the advantage of running directly counter to the ingrained
and pernicious maxim of Wall Street that stocks should be bought
because they have gone up and sold because they have gone down.
Alas, after 1949 this formula no longer worked. A second illustra-
tion is provided by the famous “Dow Theory” of stock-market
movements, in a comparison of its indicated splendid results for
1897–1933 and its much more questionable performance since
1934.
A third and final example of the golden opportunities not
recently available: A good part of our own operations on Wall
Street had been concentrated on the purchase of bargain issues eas-
ily identified as such by the fact that they were selling at less than
their share in the net current assets (working capital) alone, not
counting the plant account and other assets, and after deducting all
liabilities ahead of the stock. It is clear that these issues were selling
at a price well below the value of the enterprise as a private busi-
ness. No proprietor or majority holder would think of selling what
he owned at so ridiculously low a figure. Strangely enough, such
Investment versus Speculation 33
errors in pricing these complex deals. They became so good at it that the
easy profits disappeared and many of these desks have been closed down.
Although Graham does discuss it again (see pp. 174–175), this sort of trad-
ing is no longer feasible or appropriate for most people, since only multi-
million-dollar trades are large enough to generate worthwhile profits.
Wealthy individuals and institutions can utilize this strategy through hedge
funds that specialize in merger or “event” arbitrage.
* The Rothschild family, led by Nathan Mayer Rothschild, was the dominant
power in European investment banking and brokerage in the nineteenth
century. For a brilliant history, see Niall Ferguson, The House of Rothschild:
Money’s Prophets, 1798–1848 (Viking, 1998).

===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
anomalies were not hard to find. In 1957 a list was published show-
ing nearly 200 issues of this type available in the market. In various
ways practically all these bargain issues turned out to be profitable,
and the average annual result proved much more remunerative
than most other investments. But they too virtually disappeared
from the stock market in the next decade, and with them a depend-
able area for shrewd and successful operation by the enterprising
investor. However, at the low prices of 1970 there again appeared a
considerable number of such “sub-working-capital” issues, and
despite the strong recovery of the market, enough of them
remained at the end of the year to make up a full-sized portfolio.
The enterprising investor under today’s conditions still has vari-
ous possibilities of achieving better than average results. The huge
list of marketable securities must include a fair number that can be
identified as undervalued by logical and reasonably dependable
standards. These should yield more satisfactory results on the
average than will the DJIA or any similarly representative list. In
our view the search for these would not be worth the investor’s
effort unless he could hope to add, say, 5% before taxes to the aver-
age annual return from the stock portion of his portfolio. We shall
try to develop one or more such approaches to stock selection for
use by the active investor.
34 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
COMMENTARY ON C HAPTER 1
All of human unhappiness comes from one single thing: not
knowing how to remain at rest in a room.
—Blaise Pascal
Why do you suppose the brokers on the floor of the New York Stock
Exchange always cheer at the sound of the closing bell—no matter
what the market did that day? Because whenever you trade, they
make money—whether you did or not. By speculating instead of invest-
ing, you lower your own odds of building wealth and raise someone
else’s.
Graham’s definition of investing could not be clearer: “
An invest-
ment operation is one which, upon thorough analysis, promises safety
of principal and an adequate return. ”1 Note that investing, according to
Graham, consists equally of three elements:
• you must thoroughly analyze a company, and the soundness of its
underlying businesses, before you buy its stock;
• you must deliberately protect yourself against serious losses;
• you must aspire to “adequate, ” not extraordinary, performance.
35
1 Graham goes even further, fleshing out each of the key terms in his defini-
tion: “thorough analysis” means “the study of the facts in the light of estab-
lished standards of safety and value” while “safety of principal” signifies
“protection against loss under all normal or reasonably likely conditions or
variations” and “adequate” (or “satisfactory”) return refers to “any rate or
amount of return, however low, which the investor is willing to accept, pro-
vided he acts with reasonable intelligence. ” ( Security Analysis, 1934 ed.,
pp. 55–56).

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
An investor calculates what a stock is worth, based on the value of
its businesses. A speculator gambles that a stock will go up in price
because somebody else will pay even more for it. As Graham once
put it, investors judge “the market price by established standards of
value, ” while speculators “base [their] standards of value upon the
market price. ”2 For a speculator, the incessant stream of stock quotes
is like oxygen; cut it off and he dies. For an investor, what Graham
called “quotational” values matter much less. Graham urges you to
invest only if you would be comfortable owning a stock even if you had
no way of knowing its daily share price.3
Like casino gambling or betting on the horses, speculating in the
market can be exciting or even rewarding (if you happen to get lucky).
But it’s the worst imaginable way to build your wealth. That’s because
Wall Street, like Las Vegas or the racetrack, has calibrated the odds
so that the house always prevails, in the end, against everyone who
tries to beat the house at its own speculative game.
On the other hand, investing is a unique kind of casino—one where
you cannot lose in the end, so long as you play only by the rules that
put the odds squarely in your favor. People who invest make money for
themselves; people who speculate make money for their brokers. And
that, in turn, is why Wall Street perennially downplays the durable
virtues of investing and hypes the gaudy appeal of speculation.
UNSAFE AT HIGH SPEED
Confusing speculation with investment, Graham warns, is always a
mistake. In the 1990s, that confusion led to mass destruction. Almost
everyone, it seems, ran out of patience at once, and America became
the Speculation Nation, populated with traders who went shooting
from stock to stock like grasshoppers whizzing around in an August
hay field.
People began believing that the test of an investment technique
was simply whether it “worked. ” If they beat the market over any
36 Commentary on Chapter 1
2 Security Analysis, 1934 ed., p. 310.
3 As Graham advised in an interview, “Ask yourself: If there was no market
for these shares, would I be willing to have an investment in this company on
these terms?” (Forbes, January 1, 1972, p. 90.)

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
period, no matter how dangerous or dumb their tactics, people
boasted that they were “right. ” But the intelligent investor has no inter-
est in being temporarily right. To reach your long-term financial goals,
you must be sustainably and reliably right. The techniques that
became so trendy in the 1990s—day trading, ignoring diversification,
flipping hot mutual funds, following stock-picking “systems”—seemed
to work. But they had no chance of prevailing in the long run, because
they failed to meet all three of Graham’s criteria for investing.
To see why temporarily high returns don’t prove anything, imagine
that two places are 130 miles apart. If I observe the 65-mph speed
limit, I can drive that distance in two hours. But if I drive 130 mph, I
can get there in one hour. If I try this and survive, am I “right”? Should
you be tempted to try it, too, because you hear me bragging that it
“worked”? Flashy gimmicks for beating the market are much the
same: In short streaks, so long as your luck holds out, they work. Over
time, they will get you killed.
In 1973, when Graham last revised The Intelligent Investor, the
annual turnover rate on the New York Stock Exchange was 20%,
meaning that the typical shareholder held a stock for five years before
selling it. By 2002, the turnover rate had hit 105%—a holding period of
only 11.4 months. Back in 1973, the average mutual fund held on to a
stock for nearly three years; by 2002, that ownership period had
shrunk to just 10.9 months. It’s as if mutual-fund managers were
studying their stocks just long enough to learn they shouldn’t have
bought them in the first place, then promptly dumping them and start-
ing all over.
Even the most respected money-management firms got antsy. In
early 1995, Jeffrey Vinik, manager of Fidelity Magellan (then the
world’s largest mutual fund), had 42.5% of its assets in technology
stocks. Vinik proclaimed that most of his shareholders “have invested
in the fund for goals that are years away....I  think their objectives are
the same as mine, and that they believe, as I do, that a long-term
approach is best. ” But six months after he wrote those high-minded
words, Vinik sold off almost all his technology shares, unloading nearly
$19 billion worth in eight frenzied weeks. So much for the “long term”!
And by 1999, Fidelity’s discount brokerage division was egging on its
clients to trade anywhere, anytime, using a Palm handheld computer—
which was perfectly in tune with the firm’s new slogan, “Every second
counts. ”
Commentary on Chapter 1 37

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
And on the NASDAQ exchange, turnover hit warp speed, as Fig-
ure 1-1 shows.4
In 1999, shares in Puma Technology, for instance, changed hands
an average of once every 5.7 days. Despite NASDAQ’s grandiose
motto—“The Stock Market for the Next Hundred Years”—many of its
customers could barely hold on to a stock for a hundred hours.
THE FINANCIAL VIDEO GAME
Wall Street made online trading sound like an instant way to mint
money: Discover Brokerage, the online arm of the venerable firm of
38 Commentary on Chapter 1
Stocks on Speed
0
5
10
15
20
25
DoubleClick
CMGI
Amazon.com
e*Trade Inktomi
RealNetworks
QualcommBroadVision
VeriSign
Puma Tec
hnology
Average length of ownership (in days)
4 Source: Steve Galbraith, Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. research report, Jan-
uary 10, 2000. The stocks in this table had an average return of 1196.4% in
1999. They lost an average of 79.1% in 2000, 35.5% in 2001, and 44.5%
in 2002—destroying all the gains of 1999, and then some.
FIGURE 1-1

===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
Morgan Stanley, ran a TV commercial in which a scruffy tow-truck
driver picks up a prosperous-looking executive. Spotting a photo of a
tropical beachfront posted on the dashboard, the executive asks,
“Vacation?” “Actually, ” replies the driver, “that’s my home. ” Taken
aback, the suit says, “Looks like an island. ” With quiet triumph, the
driver answers, “Technically, it’s a country. ”
The propaganda went further. Online trading would take no work
and require no thought. A television ad from Ameritrade, the online
broker, showed two housewives just back from jogging; one logs on
to her computer, clicks the mouse a few times, and exults, “I think I just
made about $1,700!” In a TV commercial for the Waterhouse broker-
age firm, someone asked basketball coach Phil Jackson, “You know
anything about the trade?” His answer: “I’m going to make it right
now. ” (How many games would Jackson’s NBA teams have won if he
had brought that philosophy to courtside? Somehow, knowing noth-
ing about the other team, but saying, “I’m ready to play them right
now, ” doesn’t sound like a championship formula.)
By 1999 at least six million people were trading online—and roughly
a tenth of them were “day trading, ” using the Internet to buy and sell
stocks at lightning speed. Everyone from showbiz diva Barbra
Streisand to Nicholas Birbas, a 25-year-old former waiter in Queens,
New York, was flinging stocks around like live coals. “Before, ” scoffed
Birbas, “I was investing for the long term and I found out that it was not
smart. ” Now, Birbas traded stocks up to 10 times a day and expected
to earn $100,000 in a year. “I can’t stand to see red in my profit-or-loss
column, ” Streisand shuddered in an interview with Fortune. “I’m Taurus
the bull, so I react to red. If I see red, I sell my stocks quickly. ”5
By pouring continuous data about stocks into bars and barber-
shops, kitchens and cafés, taxicabs and truck stops, financial web-
sites and financial TV turned the stock market into a nonstop national
video game. The public felt more knowledgeable about the markets
than ever before. Unfortunately, while people were drowning in data,
knowledge was nowhere to be found. Stocks became entirely decou-
Commentary on Chapter 1 39
5 Instead of stargazing, Streisand should have been channeling Graham.
The intelligent investor never dumps a stock purely because its share price
has fallen; she always asks first whether the value of the company’s underly-
ing businesses has changed.

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
pled from the companies that had issued them—pure abstractions, just
blips moving across a TV or computer screen. If the blips were moving
up, nothing else mattered.
On December 20, 1999, Juno Online Services unveiled a trailblaz-
ing business plan: to lose as much money as possible, on purpose.
Juno announced that it would henceforth offer all its retail services for
free—no charge for e-mail, no charge for Internet access—and that it
would spend millions of dollars more on advertising over the next year.
On this declaration of corporate hara-kiri, Juno’s stock roared up from
$16.375 to $66.75 in two days.6
Why bother learning whether a business was profitable, or what
goods or services a company produced, or who its management was,
or even what the company’s name was? All you needed to know
about stocks was the catchy code of their ticker symbols: CBLT, INKT,
PCLN, TGLO, VRSN, WBVN. 7 That way you could buy them even
faster, without the pesky two-second delay of looking them up on an
Internet search engine. In late 1998, the stock of a tiny, rarely traded
building-maintenance company, Temco Services, nearly tripled in a
matter of minutes on record-high volume. Why? In a bizarre form of
financial dyslexia, thousands of traders bought Temco after mistaking
its ticker symbol, TMCO, for that of Ticketmaster Online (TMCS), an
Internet darling whose stock began trading publicly for the first time
that day.8
Oscar Wilde joked that a cynic “knows the price of everything, and
the value of nothing. ” Under that definition, the stock market is always
cynical, but by the late 1990s it would have shocked Oscar himself. A
single half-baked opinion on price could double a company’s stock
even as its value went entirely unexamined. In late 1998, Henry Blod-
get, an analyst at CIBC Oppenheimer, warned that “as with all Inter-
net stocks, a valuation is clearly more art than science. ” Then, citing
only the possibility of future growth, he jacked up his “price target” on
40 Commentary on Chapter 1
6 Just 12 months later, Juno’s shares had shriveled to $1.093.
7 A ticker symbol is an abbreviation, usually one to four letters long, of a
company’s name used as shorthand to identify a stock for trading purposes.
8 This was not an isolated incident; on at least three other occasions in the
late 1990s, day traders sent the wrong stock soaring when they mistook its
ticker symbol for that of a newly minted Internet company.

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
Amazon.com from $150 to $400 in one fell swoop. Amazon.com shot
up 19% that day and—despite Blodget’s protest that his price target
was a one-year forecast—soared past $400 in just three weeks. A year
later, PaineWebber analyst Walter Piecyk predicted that Qualcomm
stock would hit $1,000 a share over the next 12 months. The stock—
already up 1,842% that year—soared another 31% that day, hitting
$659 a share.9
FROM FORMULA TO FIASCO
But trading as if your underpants are on fire is not the only form of
speculation. Throughout the past decade or so, one speculative for-
mula after another was promoted, popularized, and then thrown aside.
All of them shared a few traits—This is quick! This is easy! And it won’t
hurt a bit!—and all of them violated at least one of Graham’s distinc-
tions between investing and speculating. Here are a few of the trendy
formulas that fell flat:
• Cash in on the calendar. The “January effect”—the tendency of
small stocks to produce big gains around the turn of the year—
was widely promoted in scholarly articles and popular books pub-
lished in the 1980s. These studies showed that if you piled into
small stocks in the second half of December and held them into
January, you would beat the market by five to 10 percentage
points. That amazed many experts. After all, if it were this easy,
surely everyone would hear about it, lots of people would do it,
and the opportunity would wither away.
What caused the January jolt? First of all, many investors sell
their crummiest stocks late in the year to lock in losses that can
cut their tax bills. Second, professional money managers grow
more cautious as the year draws to a close, seeking to preserve
their outperformance (or minimize their underperformance). That
makes them reluctant to buy (or even hang on to) a falling stock.
And if an underperforming stock is also small and obscure, a
money manager will be even less eager to show it in his year-end
Commentary on Chapter 1 41
9 In 2000 and 2001, Amazon.com and Qualcomm lost a cumulative total of
85.8% and 71.3% of their value, respectively.

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
list of holdings. All these factors turn small stocks into momentary
bargains; when the tax-driven selling ceases in January, they typi-
cally bounce back, producing a robust and rapid gain.
The January effect has not withered away, but it has weakened.
According to finance professor William Schwert of the University of
Rochester, if you had bought small stocks in late December and
sold them in early January, you would have beaten the market by 8.5
percentage points from 1962 through 1979, by 4.4 points from
1980 through 1989, and by 5.8 points from 1990 through 2001.10
As more people learned about the January effect, more traders
bought small stocks in December, making them less of a bargain
and thus reducing their returns. Also, the January effect is biggest
among the smallest stocks—but according to Plexus Group, the
leading authority on brokerage expenses, the total cost of buying
and selling such tiny stocks can run up to 8% of your invest-
ment.11 Sadly, by the time you’re done paying your broker, all your
gains on the January effect will melt away.
• Just do “what works. ” In 1996, an obscure money manager
named James O’Shaughnessy published a book called What
Works on Wall Street. In it, he argued that “investors can do
much better than the market. ” O’Shaughnessy made a stunning
claim: From 1954 through 1994, you could have turned $10,000
into $8,074,504, beating the market by more than 10-fold—a tow-
ering 18.2% average annual return. How? By buying a basket of
50 stocks with the highest one-year returns, five straight years of
rising earnings, and share prices less than 1.5 times their corpo-
rate revenues. 12 As if he were the Edison of Wall Street,
O’Shaughnessy obtained U.S. Patent No. 5,978,778 for his “auto-
mated strategies” and launched a group of four mutual funds
based on his findings. By late 1999 the funds had sucked in more
than $175 million from the public—and, in his annual letter to
shareholders, O’Shaughnessy stated grandly: “As always, I hope
42 Commentary on Chapter 1
10 Schwert discusses these findings in a brilliant research paper, “Anomalies and
Market Efficiency, ” available at http://schwert.ssb.rochester.edu/papers.htm.
11 See Plexus Group Commentary 54, “The Official Icebergs of Transaction
Costs, ” January, 1998, at www.plexusgroup.com/fs_research.html.
12 James O’Shaughnessy, What Works on Wall Street(McGraw-Hill, 1996),
pp. xvi, 273–295.

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
Commentary on Chapter 1 43
What Used to Work on Wall Street . . .
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
Nov-96Feb-97May-97Aug-97Nov-97Feb-98May-98Aug-98Nov-98Feb-99May-99Aug-99Nov-99Feb-00May-00Aug-00
Value of $100 invested on November 1, 1996
O’Shaughnessy Cornerstone Growth
O’Shaughnessy Cornerstone Value
O’Shaughnessy Aggressive Growth
O’Shaughnessy Dogs of the Market
Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index
FIGURE 1-2
that together, we can reach our long-term goals by staying the
course and sticking with our time-tested investment strategies. ”
But “what works on Wall Street” stopped working right after
O’Shaughnessy publicized it. As Figure 1-2 shows, two of his
funds stank so badly that they shut down in early 2000, and the
Source: Morningstar, Inc.

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
overall stock market (as measured by the S & P 500 index) wal-
loped every O’Shaughnessy fund almost nonstop for nearly four
years running.
In June 2000, O’Shaughnessy moved closer to his own “long-
term goals” by turning the funds over to a new manager, leaving
his customers to fend for themselves with those “time-tested
investment strategies. ”13 O’Shaughnessy’s shareholders might
have been less upset if he had given his book a more precise
title—for instance, What Used to Work on Wall Street . . . Until I
Wrote This Book.
• Follow “The Foolish Four. ” In the mid-1990s, the Motley Fool
website (and several books) hyped the daylights out of a tech-
nique called “The Foolish Four. ” According to the Motley Fool, you
would have “trashed the market averages over the last 25 years”
and could “crush your mutual funds” by spending “only 15 min-
utes a year” on planning your investments. Best of all, this tech-
nique had “minimal risk. ” All you needed to do was this:
1. Take the five stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average with
the lowest stock prices and highest dividend yields.
2. Discard the one with the lowest price.
3. Put 40% of your money in the stock with the second-lowest
price.
4. Put 20% in each of the three remaining stocks.
5. One year later, sort the Dow the same way and reset the
portfolio according to steps 1 through 4.
6. Repeat until wealthy.
Over a 25-year period, the Motley Fool claimed, this technique
would have beaten the market by a remarkable 10.1 percentage
44 Commentary on Chapter 1
13 In a remarkable irony, the surviving two O’Shaughnessy funds (now
known as the Hennessy funds) began performing quite well just as
O’Shaughnessy announced that he was turning over the management to
another company. The funds’ shareholders were furious. In a chat room at
www.morningstar.com, one fumed: “I guess ‘long term’ for O’S is 3 years.
...I  feel your pain. I, too, had faith in O’S’s method. ...I  had told several
friends and relatives about this fund, and now am glad they didn’t act on my
advice. ”

===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
points annually. Over the next two decades, they suggested,
$20,000 invested in The Foolish Four should flower into
$1,791,000. (And, they claimed, you could do still better by pick-
ing the five Dow stocks with the highest ratio of dividend yield to
the square root of stock price, dropping the one that scored the
highest, and buying the next four.)
Let’s consider whether this “strategy” could meet Graham’s
definitions of an investment:
• What kind of “thorough analysis” could justify discarding the
stock with the single most attractive price and dividend—but
keeping the four that score lower for those desirable qualities?
• How could putting 40% of your money into only one stock be a
“minimal risk”?
• And how could a portfolio of only four stocks be diversified
enough to provide “safety of principal”?
The Foolish Four, in short, was one of the most cockamamie
stock-picking formulas ever concocted. The Fools made the same
mistake as O’Shaughnessy: If you look at a large quantity of data
long enough, a huge number of patterns will emerge—if only by
chance. By random luck alone, the companies that produce
above-average stock returns will have plenty of things in common.
But unless those factors cause the stocks to outperform, they
can’t be used to predict future returns.
None of the factors that the Motley Fools “discovered” with
such fanfare—dropping the stock with the best score, doubling up
on the one with the second-highest score, dividing the dividend
yield by the square root of stock price—could possibly cause or
explain the future performance of a stock. Money Magazine found
that a portfolio made up of stocks whose names contained no
repeating letters would have performed nearly as well as The
Foolish Four—and for the same reason: luck alone. 14 As Graham
never stops reminding us, stocks do well or poorly in the future
because the businesses behind them do well or poorly—nothing
more, and nothing less.
Commentary on Chapter 1 45
14 See Jason Zweig, “False Profits, ” Money, August, 1999, pp. 55–57 . A
thorough discussion of The Foolish Four can also be found at www.investor
home.com/fool.htm.

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
Sure enough, instead of crushing the market, The Foolish Four
crushed the thousands of people who were fooled into believing
that it was a form of investing. In 2000 alone, the four Foolish
stocks—Caterpillar, Eastman Kodak, SBC, and General Motors—
lost 14% while the Dow dropped by just 4.7%.
As these examples show, there’s only one thing that never suffers a
bear market on Wall Street: dopey ideas. Each of these so-called
investing approaches fell prey to Graham’s Law. All mechanical formu-
las for earning higher stock performance are “a kind of self-destructive
process—akin to the law of diminishing returns. ” There are two reasons
the returns fade away. If the formula was just based on random statis-
tical flukes (like The Foolish Four), the mere passage of time will
expose that it made no sense in the first place. On the other hand, if
the formula actually did work in the past (like the January effect), then
by publicizing it, market pundits always erode—and usually eliminate—
its ability to do so in the future.
All this reinforces Graham’s warning that you must treat specula-
tion as veteran gamblers treat their trips to the casino:
• You must never delude yourself into thinking that you’re investing
when you’re speculating.
• Speculating becomes mortally dangerous the moment you begin
to take it seriously.
• You must put strict limits on the amount you are willing to wager.
Just as sensible gamblers take, say, $100 down to the casino floor
and leave the rest of their money locked in the safe in their hotel room,
the intelligent investor designates a tiny portion of her total portfolio as
a “mad money” account. For most of us, 10% of our overall wealth is
the maximum permissible amount to put at speculative risk. Never min-
gle the money in your speculative account with what’s in your invest-
ment accounts; never allow your speculative thinking to spill over into
your investing activities; and never put more than 10% of your assets
into your mad money account, no matter what happens.
For better or worse, the gambling instinct is part of human nature—
so it’s futile for most people even to try suppressing it. But you must
confine and restrain it. That’s the single best way to make sure you will
never fool yourself into confusing speculation with investment.
46 Commentary on Chapter 1
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 8 | PDF PAGES 202-239 =====

===== PDF PAGE 202 =====
CHAPTER 8
The Investor and Market Fluctuations
To the extent that the investor’s funds are placed in high-grade
bonds of relatively short maturity—say, of seven years or less—he
will not be affected significantly by changes in market prices and
need not take them into account. (This applies also to his holdings
of U.S. savings bonds, which he can always turn in at his cost price
or more.) His longer-term bonds may have relatively wide price
swings during their lifetimes, and his common-stock portfolio is
almost certain to fluctuate in value over any period of several
years.
The investor should know about these possibilities and should
be prepared for them both financially and psychologically. He will
want to benefit from changes in market levels—certainly through
an advance in the value of his stock holdings as time goes on, and
perhaps also by making purchases and sales at advantageous
prices. This interest on his part is inevitable, and legitimate
enough. But it involves the very real danger that it will lead him
into speculative attitudes and activities. It is easy for us to tell you
not to speculate; the hard thing will be for you to follow this
advice. Let us repeat what we said at the outset: If you want to
speculate do so with your eyes open, knowing that you will proba-
bly lose money in the end; be sure to limit the amount at risk and to
separate it completely from your investment program.
We shall deal first with the more important subject of price
changes in common stocks, and pass later to the area of bonds. 
In Chapter 3 we supplied a historical survey of the stock market’s
action over the past hundred years. In this section we shall return
to that material from time to time, in order to see what the past
record promises the investor—in either the form of long-term
appreciation of a portfolio held relatively unchanged through 
188

===== PDF PAGE 203 =====
successive rises and declines, or in the possibilities of buying 
near bear-market lows and selling not too far below bull-market
highs.
Market Fluctuations as a Guide to Investment Decisions
Since common stocks, even of investment grade, are subject to
recurrent and wide fluctuations in their prices, the intelligent
investor should be interested in the possibilities of profiting from
these pendulum swings. There are two possible ways by which 
he may try to do this: the way of 
timing and the way of pricing.
By timing we mean the endeavor to anticipate the action of the
stock market—to buy or hold when the future course is deemed 
to be upward, to sell or refrain from buying when the course 
is downward. By pricing we mean the endeavor to buy stocks
when they are quoted below their fair value and to sell them when
they rise above such value. A less ambitious form of pricing is 
the simple effort to make sure that when you buy you do not 
pay too much for your stocks. This may suffice for the defen-
sive investor, whose emphasis is on long-pull holding; but as 
such it represents an essential minimum of attention to market 
levels.1
We are convinced that the intelligent investor can derive satis-
factory results from pricing of either type. We are equally sure that
if he places his emphasis on timing, in the sense of forecasting, he
will end up as a speculator and with a speculator’s financial
results. This distinction may seem rather tenuous to the layman,
and it is not commonly accepted on Wall Street. As a matter of
business practice, or perhaps of thoroughgoing conviction, the
stock brokers and the investment services seem wedded to the
principle that both investors and speculators in common stocks
should devote careful attention to market forecasts.
The farther one gets from Wall Street, the more skepticism one
will find, we believe, as to the pretensions of stock-market forecast-
ing or timing. The investor can scarcely take seriously the innumer-
able predictions which appear almost daily and are his for the
asking. Yet in many cases he pays attention to them and even acts
upon them. Why? Because he has been persuaded that it is impor-
tant for him to form some opinion of the future course of the stock
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 189

===== PDF PAGE 204 =====
market, and because he feels that the brokerage or service forecast
is at least more dependable than his own.*
We lack space here to discuss in detail the pros and cons of mar-
ket forecasting. A great deal of brain power goes into this field, and
undoubtedly some people can make money by being good stock-
market analysts. But it is absurd to think that the general public can
ever make money out of market forecasts. For who will buy when
the general public, at a given signal, rushes to sell out at a profit? If
you, the reader, expect to get rich over the years by following some
system or leadership in market forecasting, you must be expecting
to try to do what countless others are aiming at, and to be able to
do it better than your numerous competitors in the market. There
is no basis either in logic or in experience for assuming that any
typical or average investor can anticipate market movements more
successfully than the general public, of which he is himself a part.
There is one aspect of the “timing” philosophy which seems to
have escaped everyone’s notice. Timing is of great psychological
importance to the speculator because he wants to make his profit in
190 The Intelligent Investor
* In the late 1990s, the forecasts of “market strategists” became more influ-
ential than ever before. They did not, unfortunately, become more accurate.
On March 10, 2000, the very day that the NASDAQ composite index hit its
all-time high of 5048.62, Prudential Securities’s chief technical analyst
Ralph Acampora said in USA Today that he expected NASDAQ to hit 6000
within 12 to 18 months. Five weeks later, NASDAQ had already shriveled to
3321.29—but Thomas Galvin, a market strategist at Donaldson, Lufkin &
Jenrette, declared that “there’s only 200 or 300 points of downside for the
NASDAQ and 2000 on the upside. ” It turned out that there were no points
on the upside and more than 2000 on the downside, as NASDAQ kept
crashing until it finally scraped bottom on October 9, 2002, at 1114.11. In
March 2001, Abby Joseph Cohen, chief investment strategist at Goldman,
Sachs & Co., predicted that the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index would
close the year at 1,650 and that the Dow Jones Industrial Average would
finish 2001 at 13,000. “We do not expect a recession, ” said Cohen, “and
believe that corporate profits are likely to grow at close to trend growth
rates later this year. ” The U.S. economy was sinking into recession even as
she spoke, and the S & P 500 ended 2001 at 1148.08, while the Dow fin-
ished at 10,021.50—30% and 23% below her forecasts, respectively.

===== PDF PAGE 205 =====
a hurry. The idea of waiting a year before his stock moves up is
repugnant to him. But a waiting period, as such, is of no conse-
quence to the investor. What advantage is there to him in having
his money uninvested until he receives some (presumably) trust-
worthy signal that the time has come to buy? He enjoys an advan-
tage only if by waiting he succeeds in buying later at a sufficiently
lower price to offset his loss of dividend income. What this means is
that timing is of no real value to the investor unless it coincides
with pricing—that is, unless it enables him to repurchase his shares
at substantially under his previous selling price.
In this respect the famous Dow theory for timing purchases and
sales has had an unusual history.* Briefly, this technique takes its
signal to buy from a special kind of “breakthrough” of the stock
averages on the up side, and its selling signal from a similar break-
through on the down side. The calculated—not necessarily
actual—results of using this method showed an almost unbroken
series of profits in operations from 1897 to the early 1960s. On the
basis of this presentation the practical value of the Dow theory
would have appeared firmly established; the doubt, if any, would
apply to the dependability of this published “record” as a picture
of what a Dow theorist would actually have done in the market.
A closer study of the figures indicates that the quality of the
results shown by the Dow theory changed radically after 1938—
a few years after the theory had begun to be taken seriously on
Wall Street. Its spectacular achievement had been in giving a sell
signal, at 306, about a month before the 1929 crash and in keeping
its followers out of the long bear market until things had pretty
well righted themselves, at 84, in 1933. But from 1938 on the Dow
theory operated mainly by taking its practitioners out at a pretty
good price but then putting them back in again at a higher price.
For nearly 30 years thereafter, one would have done appreciably
better by just buying and holding the DJIA.2
In our view, based on much study of this problem, the change in
the Dow-theory results is not accidental. It demonstrates an inher-
ent characteristic of forecasting and trading formulas in the fields
of business and finance. Those formulas that gain adherents and
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 191
* See p. 3.

===== PDF PAGE 206 =====
importance do so because they have worked well over a period, or
sometimes merely because they have been plausibly adapted to the
statistical record of the past. But as their acceptance increases, their
reliability tends to diminish. This happens for two reasons: First,
the passage of time brings new conditions which the old formula
no longer fits. Second, in stock-market affairs the popularity of a
trading theory has itself an influence on the market’s behavior
which detracts in the long run from its profit-making possibilities.
(The popularity of something like the Dow theory may seem to cre-
ate its own vindication, since it would make the market advance or
decline by the very action of its followers when a buying or selling
signal is given. A “stampede” of this kind is, of course, much more
of a danger than an advantage to the public trader.)
Buy-Low–Sell-High Approach
We are convinced that the average investor cannot deal success-
fully with price movements by endeavoring to forecast them. Can
he benefit from them after they have taken place—i.e., by buying
after each major decline and selling out after each major advance?
The fluctuations of the market over a period of many years prior to
1950 lent considerable encouragement to that idea. In fact, a classic
definition of a “shrewd investor” was “one who bought in a bear
market when everyone else was selling, and sold out in a bull mar-
ket when everyone else was buying.” If we examine our Chart I,
covering the fluctuations of the Standard & Poor’s composite index
between 1900 and 1970, and the supporting figures in Table 3-1 (p.
66), we can readily see why this viewpoint appeared valid until
fairly recent years.
Between 1897 and 1949 there were ten complete market cycles,
running from bear-market low to bull-market high and back to
bear-market low. Six of these took no longer than four years, four
ran for six or seven years, and one—the famous “new-era” cycle of
1921–1932—lasted eleven years. The percentage of advance from
the lows to highs ranged from 44% to 500%, with most between
about 50% and 100%. The percentage of subsequent declines
ranged from 24% to 89%, with most found between 40% and 50%.
(It should be remembered that a decline of 50% fully offsets a pre-
ceding advance of 100%.)
192 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 207 =====
Nearly all the bull markets had a number of well-defined char-
acteristics in common, such as (1) a historically high price level, (2)
high price/earnings ratios, (3) low dividend yields as against bond
yields, (4) much speculation on margin, and (5) many offerings of
new common-stock issues of poor quality. Thus to the student of
stock-market history it appeared that the intelligent investor
should have been able to identify the recurrent bear and bull mar-
kets, to buy in the former and sell in the latter, and to do so for the
most part at reasonably short intervals of time. Various methods
were developed for determining buying and selling levels of the
general market, based on either value factors or percentage move-
ments of prices or both.
But we must point out that even prior to the unprecedented bull
market that began in 1949, there were sufficient variations in the
successive market cycles to complicate and sometimes frustrate the
desirable process of buying low and selling high. The most notable
of these departures, of course, was the great bull market of the late
1920s, which threw all calculations badly out of gear.* Even in 1949,
therefore, it was by no means a certainty that the investor could
base his financial policies and procedures mainly on the endeavor
to buy at low levels in bear markets and to sell out at high levels in
bull markets.
It turned out, in the sequel, that the opposite was true. The
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 193
* Without bear markets to take stock prices back down, anyone waiting to
“buy low” will feel completely left behind—and, all too often, will end up
abandoning any former caution and jumping in with both feet. That’s why
Graham’s message about the importance of emotional discipline is so
important. From October 1990 through January 2000, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average marched relentlessly upward, never losing more than
20% and suffering a loss of 10% or more only three times. The total gain
(not counting dividends): 395.7%. According to Crandall, Pierce & Co., this
was the second-longest uninterrupted bull market of the past century; only
the 1949–1961 boom lasted 
longer. The longer a bull market lasts, the
more severely investors will be afflicted with amnesia; after five years or so,
many people no longer believe that bear markets are even possible. All
those who forget are doomed to be reminded; and, in the stock market,
recovered memories are always unpleasant.

===== PDF PAGE 208 =====
market’s behavior in the past 20 years has not followed the former
pattern, nor obeyed what once were well-established danger sig-
nals, nor permitted its successful exploitation by applying old rules
for buying low and selling high. Whether the old, fairly regular
bull-and-bear-market pattern will eventually return we do not
know. But it seems unrealistic to us for the investor to endeavor to
base his present policy on the classic formula—i.e., to wait for
demonstrable bear-market levels before buying any common
stocks. Our r
ecommended policy has, however, made provision 
for changes in the proportion of common stocks to bonds in the
portfolio, if the investor chooses to do so, according as the level 
of stock prices appears less or more attractive by value stan-
dards.*
Formula Plans
In the early years of the stock-market rise that began in 1949–50
considerable interest was attracted to various methods of taking
advantage of the stock market’s cycles. These have been known as
“formula investment plans.” The essence of all such plans—except
the simple case of dollar averaging—is that the investor automati-
cally does some selling of common stocks when the market
advances substantially. In many of them a very large rise in the
market level would result in the sale of all common-stock holdings;
others provided for retention of a minor proportion of equities
under all circumstances.
This approach had the double appeal of sounding logical (and
conservative) and of showing excellent results when applied retro-
spectively to the stock market over many years in the past. Unfor-
tunately, its vogue grew greatest at the very time when it was
destined to work least well. Many of the “formula planners” found
themselves entirely or nearly out of the stock market at some level
in the middle 1950s. True, they had realized excellent profits, but in
a broad sense the market “ran away” from them thereafter, and
194 The Intelligent Investor
* Graham discusses this “recommended policy” in Chapter 4 (pp. 89–91).
This policy, now called “tactical asset allocation, ” is widely followed by insti-
tutional investors like pension funds and university endowments.

===== PDF PAGE 209 =====
their formulas gave them little opportunity to buy back a common-
stock position.*
There is a similarity between the experience of those adopting
the formula-investing approach in the early 1950s and those who
embraced the purely mechanical version of the Dow theory some
20 years earlier. In both cases the advent of popularity marked
almost the exact moment when the system ceased to work well. We
have had a like discomfiting experience with our own “central
value method” of determining indicated buying and selling levels
of the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The moral seems to be that
any approach to moneymaking in the stock market which can be
easily described and followed by a lot of people is by its terms too
simple and too easy to last.† Spinoza’s concluding remark applies
to Wall Street as well as to philosophy: “All things excellent are as
difficult as they are rare.”
Market Fluctuations of the Investor’s Portfolio
Every investor who owns common stocks must expect to see
them fluctuate in value over the years. The behavior of the DJIA
since our last edition was written in 1964 probably reflects pretty
well what has happened to the stock portfolio of a conservative
investor who limited his stock holdings to those of large, promi-
nent, and conservatively financed corporations. The overall value
advanced from an average level of about 890 to a high of 995 in
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 195
* Many of these “formula planners” would have sold all their stocks at the
end of 1954, after the U.S. stock market rose 52.6%, the second-highest
yearly return then on record. Over the next five years, these market-timers
would likely have stood on the sidelines as stocks doubled.
† Easy ways to make money in the stock market fade for two reasons: the
natural tendency of trends to reverse over time, or “regress to the mean, ”
and the rapid adoption of the stock-picking scheme by large numbers of
people, who pile in and spoil all the fun of those who got there first. (Note
that, in referring to his “discomfiting experience, ” Graham is—as always—
honest in admitting his own failures.) See Jason Zweig, “Murphy Was an
Investor, ” Money, July, 2002, pp. 61–62, and Jason Zweig, “New Year’s
Play, ” Money, December, 2000, pp. 89–90.

===== PDF PAGE 210 =====
1966 (and 985 again in 1968), fell to 631 in 1970, and made an
almost full recovery to 940 in early 1971. (Since the individual
issues set their high and low marks at different times, the fluc-
tuations in the Dow Jones group as a whole are less severe than
those in the separate components.) We have traced through the
price fluctuations of other types of diversified and conservative 
common-stock portfolios and we find that the overall results are
not likely to be markedly different from the above. In general, the
shares of second-line companies* fluctuate more widely than the
major ones, but this does not necessarily mean that a group of well-
established but smaller companies will make a poorer showing
over a fairly long period. In any case the investor may as well
resign himself in advance to the probability rather than the mere
possibility that most of his holdings will advance, say, 50% or more
from their low point and decline the equivalent one-third or more
from their high point at various periods in the next five years.†
A serious investor is not likely to believe that the day-to-day or
even month-to-month fluctuations of the stock market make him
richer or poorer. But what about the longer-term and wider
changes? Here practical questions present themselves, and the psy-
chological problems are likely to grow complicated. A substantial
rise in the market is at once a legitimate reason for satisfaction and
a cause for prudent concern, but it may also bring a strong tempta-
tion toward imprudent action. Your shares have advanced, good!
196 The Intelligent Investor
* Today’s equivalent of what Graham calls “second-line companies” would
be any of the thousands of stocks not included in the Standard & Poor’s
500-stock index. A regularly revised list of the 500 stocks in the S & P index
is available at www.standardandpoors.com.
† Note carefully what Graham is saying here. It is not just possible, but prob-
able, that most of the stocks you own will gain at least 50% from their low-
est price and lose at least 33% from their highest price—regardless of which
stocks you own or whether the market as a whole goes up or down. If you
can’t live with that—or you think your portfolio is somehow magically exempt
from it—then you are not yet entitled to call yourself an investor. (Graham
refers to a 33% decline as the “equivalent one-third” because a 50% gain
takes a $10 stock to $15. From $15, a 33% loss [or $5 drop] takes it right
back to $10, where it started.)

===== PDF PAGE 211 =====
You are richer than you were, good! But has the price risen too high,
and should you think of selling? Or should you kick yourself for
not having bought more shares when the level was lower? Or—
worst thought of all—should you now give way to the bull-market
atmosphere, become infected with the enthusiasm, the overconfi-
dence and the greed of the great public (of which, after all, you are
a part), and make larger and dangerous commitments? Presented
thus in print, the answer to the last question is a self-evident no, but
even the intelligent investor is likely to need considerable will
power to keep from following the crowd.
It is for these reasons of human nature, even more than by calcu-
lation of financial gain or loss, that we favor some kind of mechan-
ical method for varying the proportion of bonds to stocks in the
investor’s portfolio. The chief advantage, perhaps, is that such a
formula will give him something to do. As the market advances he
will from time to time make sales out of his stockholdings, putting
the proceeds into bonds; as it declines he will reverse the proce-
dure. These activities will provide some outlet for his otherwise
too-pent-up energies. If he is the right kind of investor he will take
added satisfaction from the thought that his operations are exactly
opposite from those of the crowd.*
Business Valuations versus Stock-Market Valuations
The impact of market fluctuations upon the investor’s true situ-
ation may be considered also from the standpoint of the share-
holder as the part owner of various businesses. The holder of
marketable shares actually has a double status, and with it the
privilege of taking advantage of either at his choice. On the one
hand his position is analogous to that of a minority shareholder or
silent partner in a private business. Here his results are entirely
dependent on the profits of the enterprise or on a change in the
underlying value of its assets. He would usually determine the
value of such a private-business interest by calculating his share of
the net worth as shown in the most recent balance sheet. On the
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 197
* For today’s investor, the ideal strategy for pursuing this “formula” is rebal-
ancing, which we discuss on pp. 104–105.

===== PDF PAGE 212 =====
other hand, the common-stock investor holds a piece of paper, an
engraved stock certificate, which can be sold in a matter of minutes
at a price which varies from moment to moment—when the mar-
ket is open, that is—and often is far removed from the balance-
sheet value.*
The development of the stock market in recent decades has
made the typical investor more dependent on the course of price
quotations and less free than formerly to consider himself merely a
business owner. The reason is that the successful enterprises in
which he is likely to concentrate his holdings sell almost constantly
at prices well above their net asset value (or book value, or 
“balance-sheet value”). In paying these market premiums the
investor gives precious hostages to fortune, for he must depend on
the stock market itself to validate his commitments.†
This is a factor of prime importance in present-day investing,
and it has received less attention than it deserves. The whole struc-
ture of stock-market quotations contains a built-in contradiction.
The better a company’s record and prospects, the less relationship
the price of its shares will have to their book value. But the greater
the premium above book value, the less certain the basis of deter-
mining its intrinsic value—i.e., the more this “value” will depend
on the changing moods and measurements of the stock market.
Thus we reach the final paradox, that the more successful the com-
pany, the greater are likely to be the fluctuations in the price of its
shares. This really means that, in a very real sense, the better the
198 The Intelligent Investor
* Most companies today provide “an engraved stock certificate” only upon
special request. Stocks exist, for the most part, in purely electronic form
(much as your bank account contains computerized credits and debits, not
actual currency) and thus have become even easier to trade than they were
in Graham’s day.
† Net asset value, book value, balance-sheet value, and tangible-asset value
are all synonyms for net worth, or the total value of a company’s physical
and financial assets minus all its liabilities. It can be calculated using the bal-
ance sheets in a company’s annual and quarterly reports; from total share-
holders’ equity, subtract all “soft” assets such as goodwill, trademarks, and
other intangibles. Divide by the fully diluted number of shares outstanding to
arrive at book value per share.

===== PDF PAGE 213 =====
quality of a common stock, the more speculative it is likely to be—at
least as compared with the unspectacular middle-grade issues.*
(What we have said applies to a comparison of the leading growth
companies with the bulk of well-established concerns; we exclude
from our purview here those issues which are highly speculative
because the businesses themselves are speculative.)
The argument made above should explain the often erratic price
behavior of our most successful and impressive enterprises. Our
favorite example is the monarch of them all—International Busi-
ness Machines. The price of its shares fell from 607 to 300 in seven
months in 1962–63; after two splits its price fell from 387 to 219 in
1970. Similarly, Xerox—an even more impressive earnings gainer
in recent decades—fell from 171 to 87 in 1962–63, and from 116 to
65 in 1970. These striking losses did not indicate any doubt about
the future long-term growth of IBM or Xerox; they reflected instead
a lack of confidence in the premium valuation that the stock mar-
ket itself had placed on these excellent prospects.
The previous discussion leads us to a conclusion of practical
importance to the conservative investor in common stocks. If he is
to pay some special attention to the selection of his portfolio, it
might be best for him to concentrate on issues selling at a reason-
ably close approximation to their tangible-asset value—say, at not
more than one-third above that figure. Purchases made at such 
levels, or lower, may with logic be regarded as related to the
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 199
* Graham’s use of the word “paradox” is probably an allusion to a classic
article by David Durand, “Growth Stocks and the Petersburg Paradox, ” The
Journal of Finance, vol. XII, no. 3, September, 1957 , pp. 348–363, which
compares investing in high-priced growth stocks to betting on a series of
coin flips in which the payoff escalates with each flip of the coin. Durand
points out that if a growth stock could continue to grow at a high rate for 
an indefinite period of time, an investor should (in theory) be willing to pay
an infinite price for its shares. Why, then, has no stock ever sold for a 
price of infinity dollars per share? Because the higher the assumed future
growth rate, and the longer the time period over which it is expected, the
wider the margin for error grows, and the higher the cost of even a tiny mis-
calculation becomes. Graham discusses this problem further in Appendix 4
(p. 570).

===== PDF PAGE 214 =====
company’s balance sheet, and as having a justification or support
independent of the fluctuating market prices. The premium over
book value that may be involved can be considered as a kind of
extra fee paid for the advantage of stock-exchange listing and the
marketability that goes with it.
A caution is needed here. 
A stock does not become a sound
investment merely because it can be bought at close to its asset
value. The investor should demand, in addition, a satisfactory ratio
of earnings to price, a sufficiently strong financial position, and the
prospect that its earnings will at least be maintained over the years.
This may appear like demanding a lot from a modestly priced
stock, but the prescription is not hard to fill under all but danger-
ously high market conditions. Once the investor is willing to forgo
brilliant prospects—i.e., better than average expected growth—he
will have no difficulty in finding a wide selection of issues meeting
these criteria.
In our chapters on the selection of common stocks (Chapters 14
and 15) we shall give data showing that more than half of the DJIA
issues met our asset-value criterion at the end of 1970. The most
widely held investment of all—American Tel. & Tel.—actually sells
below its tangible-asset value as we write. Most of the light-and-
power shares, in addition to their other advantages, are now (early
1972) available at prices reasonably close to their asset values.
The investor with a stock portfolio having such book values
behind it can take a much more independent and detached view of
stock-market fluctuations than those who have paid high multipli-
ers of both earnings and tangible assets. As long as the earning
power of his holdings remains satisfactory, he can give as little
attention as he pleases to the vagaries of the stock market. More
than that, at times he can use these vagaries to play the master
game of buying low and selling high.
The A. & P . Example
At this point we shall introduce one of our original examples,
which dates back many years but which has a certain fascination
for us because it combines so many aspects of corporate and
investment experience. It involves the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea
Co. Here is the story:
200 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 215 =====
A. & P . shares were introduced to trading on the “Curb” market,
now the American Stock Exchange, in 1929 and sold as high as 494.
By 1932 they had declined to 104, although the company’s earnings
were nearly as large in that generally catastrophic year as previ-
ously. In 1936 the range was between 111 and 131. Then in the busi-
ness recession and bear market of 1938 the shares fell to a new low
of 36.
That price was extraordinary. It meant that the preferred and
common were together selling for $126 million, although the com-
pany had just reported that it held $85 million in cash alone and a
working capital (or net current assets) of $134 million. A. & P . was
the largest retail enterprise in America, if not in the world, with a
continuous and impressive record of large earnings for many
years. Yet in 1938 this outstanding business was considered on
Wall Street to be worth less than its current assets alone—which
means less as a going concern than if it were liquidated. Why?
First, because there were threats of special taxes on chain stores;
second, because net profits had fallen off in the previous year; and,
third, because the general market was depressed. The first of these
reasons was an exaggerated and eventually groundless fear; the
other two were typical of temporary influences.
Let us assume that the investor had bought A. & P . common in
1937 at, say, 12 times its five-year average earnings, or about 80. We
are far from asserting that the ensuing decline to 36 was of no
importance to him. He would have been well advised to scrutinize
the picture with some care, to see whether he had made any mis-
calculations. But if the results of his study were reassuring—as
they should have been—he was entitled then to disregard the mar-
ket decline as a temporary vagary of finance, unless he had the
funds and the courage to take advantage of it by buying more on
the bargain basis offered.
Sequel and Reflections
The following year, 1939, A. & P . shares advanced to 117 1⁄2, or
three times the low price of 1938 and well above the average of
1937. Such a turnabout in the behavior of common stocks is by no
means uncommon, but in the case of A. & P . it was more striking
than most. In the years after 1949 the grocery chain’s shares rose
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 201

===== PDF PAGE 216 =====
with the general market until in 1961 the split-up stock (10 for 1)
reached a high of 70 1⁄2 which was equivalent to 705 for the 1938
shares.
This price of 701⁄2 was remarkable for the fact it was 30 times the
earnings of 1961. Such a price/earnings ratio—which compares
with 23 times for the DJIA in that year—must have implied expec-
tations of a brilliant growth in earnings. This optimism had no jus-
tification in the company’s earnings record in the preceding years,
and it proved completely wrong. Instead of advancing rapidly, the
course of earnings in the ensuing period was generally downward.
The year after the 70 1⁄2 high the price fell by more than half to 34.
But this time the shares did not have the bargain quality that they
showed at the low quotation in 1938. After varying sorts of fluctua-
tions the price fell to another low of 21 1⁄2 in 1970 and 18 in 1972—
having reported the first quarterly deficit in its history.
We see in this history how wide can be the vicissitudes of a
major American enterprise in little more than a single generation,
and also with what miscalculations and excesses of optimism and
pessimism the public has valued its shares. In 1938 the business
was really being given away, with no takers; in 1961 the public was
clamoring for the shares at a ridiculously high price. After that
came a quick loss of half the market value, and some years later a
substantial further decline. In the meantime the company was to
turn from an outstanding to a mediocre earnings performer; its
profit in the boom-year 1968 was to be less than in 1958; it had paid
a series of confusing small stock dividends not warranted by the
current additions to surplus; and so forth. A. & P . was a larger com-
pany in 1961 and 1972 than in 1938, but not as well-run, not as
profitable, and not as attractive.*
There are two chief morals to this story. The first is that the stock
market often goes far wrong, and sometimes an alert and coura-
202 The Intelligent Investor
* The more recent history of A & P is no different. At year-end 1999, its
share price was $27 .875; at year-end 2000, $7 .00; a year later, $23.78; at
year-end 2002, $8.06. Although some accounting irregularities later came
to light at A & P, it defies all logic to believe that the value of a relatively sta-
ble business like groceries could fall by three-fourths in one year, triple the
next year, then drop by two-thirds the year after that.

===== PDF PAGE 217 =====
geous investor can take advantage of its patent errors. The other is
that most businesses change in character and quality over the
years, sometimes for the better, perhaps more often for the worse.
The investor need not watch his companies’ performance like a
hawk; but he should give it a good, hard look from time to time.
Let us return to our comparison between the holder of mar-
ketable shares and the man with an interest in a private business.
We have said that the former has the option of considering himself
merely as the part owner of the various businesses he has invested
in, or as the holder of shares which are salable at any time he
wishes at their quoted market price.
But note this important fact: The true investor scarcely ever is
forced to sell his shares, and at all other times he is free to disregard
the current price quotation. He need pay attention to it and act
upon it only to the extent that it suits his book, and no more.* Thus
the investor who permits himself to be stampeded or unduly wor-
ried by unjustified market declines in his holdings is perversely
transforming his basic advantage into a basic disadvantage. That
man would be better off if his stocks had no market quotation at
all, for he would then be spared the mental anguish caused him by
other persons’ mistakes of judgment.†
Incidentally, a widespread situation of this kind actually existed
during the dark depression days of 1931–1933. There was then a
psychological advantage in owning business interests that had no
quoted market. For example, people who owned first mortgages
on real estate that continued to pay interest were able to tell them-
selves that their investments had kept their full value, there being
no market quotations to indicate otherwise. On the other hand,
many listed corporation bonds of even better quality and greater
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 203
* “Only to the extent that it suits his book” means “only to the extent that the
price is favorable enough to justify selling the stock. ” In traditional brokerage
lingo, the “book” is an investor’s ledger of holdings and trades.
† This may well be the single most important paragraph in Graham’s entire
book. In these 113 words Graham sums up his lifetime of experience. You
cannot read these words too often; they are like Kryptonite for bear markets.
If you keep them close at hand and let them guide you throughout your
investing life, you will survive whatever the markets throw at you.

===== PDF PAGE 218 =====
underlying strength suffered severe shrinkages in their market
quotations, thus making their owners believe they were growing
distinctly poorer. In reality the owners were better off with the
listed securities, despite the low prices of these. For if they had
wanted to, or were compelled to, they could at least have sold the
issues—possibly to exchange them for even better bargains. Or
they could just as logically have ignored the market’s action as
temporary and basically meaningless. But it is self-deception to tell
yourself that you have suffered no shrinkage in value merely
because your securities have no quoted market at all.
Returning to our A. & P . shareholder in 1938, we assert that as
long as he held on to his shares he suffered no loss in their price
decline, beyond what his own judgment may have told him was
occasioned by a shrinkage in their underlying or intrinsic value. If
no such shrinkage had occurred, he had a right to expect that in
due course the market quotation would return to the 1937 level or
better—as in fact it did the following year. In this respect his posi-
tion was at least as good as if he had owned an interest in a private
business with no quoted market for its shares. For in that case, too,
he might or might not have been justified in mentally lopping off
part of the cost of his holdings because of the impact of the 1938
recession—depending on what had happened to his company.
Critics of the value approach to stock investment argue that
listed common stocks cannot properly be regarded or appraised in
the same way as an interest in a similar private enterprise, because
the presence of an organized security market “injects into equity
ownership the new and extremely important attribute of liquidity.”
But what this liquidity really means is, first, that the investor has
the benefit of the stock market’s daily and changing appraisal of
his holdings, for whatever that appraisal may be worth, and, second,
that the investor is able to increase or decrease his investment at
the market’s daily figure— if he chooses. Thus the existence of a
quoted market gives the investor certain options that he does not
have if his security is unquoted. But it does not impose the current
quotation on an investor who prefers to take his idea of value from
some other source.
Let us close this section with something in the nature of a para-
ble. Imagine that in some private business you own a small share
that cost you $1,000. One of your partners, named Mr. Market, is
204 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 219 =====
very obliging indeed. Every day he tells you what he thinks your
interest is worth and furthermore offers either to buy you out or to
sell you an additional interest on that basis. Sometimes his idea of
value appears plausible and justified by business developments
and prospects as you know them. Often, on the other hand, Mr.
Market lets his enthusiasm or his fears run away with him, and the
value he proposes seems to you a little short of silly.
If you are a prudent investor or a sensible businessman, will you
let Mr. Market’s daily communication determine your view of the
value of a $1,000 interest in the enterprise? Only in case you agree
with him, or in case you want to trade with him. You may be happy
to sell out to him when he quotes you a ridiculously high price,
and equally happy to buy from him when his price is low. But the
rest of the time you will be wiser to form your own ideas of the
value of your holdings, based on full reports from the company
about its operations and financial position.
The true investor is in that very position when he owns a listed
common stock. He can take advantage of the daily market price or
leave it alone, as dictated by his own judgment and inclination. He
must take cognizance of important price movements, for otherwise
his judgment will have nothing to work on. Conceivably they may
give him a warning signal which he will do well to heed—this in
plain English means that he is to sell his shares because the price has
gone down, foreboding worse things to come. In our view such sig-
nals are misleading at least as often as they are helpful. Basically,
price fluctuations have only one significant meaning for the true
investor. They provide him with an opportunity to buy wisely
when prices fall sharply and to sell wisely when they advance a
great deal. At other times he will do better if he forgets about the
stock market and pays attention to his dividend returns and to the
operating results of his companies.
Summary
The most realistic distinction between the investor and the spec-
ulator is found in their attitude toward stock-market movements.
The speculator’s primary interest lies in anticipating and profiting
from market fluctuations. The investor’s primary interest lies in
acquiring and holding suitable securities at suitable prices. Market
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 205

===== PDF PAGE 220 =====
movements are important to him in a practical sense, because they
alternately create low price levels at which he would be wise to
buy and high price levels at which he certainly should refrain from
buying and probably would be wise to sell.
It is far from certain that the typical investor should regularly
hold off buying until low market levels appear, because this may
involve a long wait, very likely the loss of income, and the possible
missing of investment opportunities. On the whole it may be better
for the investor to do his stock buying whenever he has money to
put in stocks, except when the general market level is much higher
than can be justified by well-established standards of value. If he
wants to be shrewd he can look for the ever-present bargain oppor-
tunities in individual securities.
Aside from forecasting the movements of the general market,
much effort and ability are directed on Wall Street toward selecting
stocks or industrial groups that in matter of price will “do better”
than the rest over a fairly short period in the future. Logical as this
endeavor may seem, we do not believe it is suited to the needs or
temperament of the true investor—particularly since he would be
competing with a large number of stock-market traders and first-
class financial analysts who are trying to do the same thing. As 
in all other activities that emphasize price movements first and
underlying values second, the work of many intelligent minds con-
stantly engaged in this field tends to be self-neutralizing and self-
defeating over the years.
The investor with a portfolio of sound stocks should expect their
prices to fluctuate and should neither be concerned by sizable
declines nor become excited by sizable advances. He should
always remember that market quotations are there for his conve-
nience, either to be taken advantage of or to be ignored. He should
never buy a stock because it has gone up or sell one because it has
gone down. He would not be far wrong if this motto read more
simply: “Never buy a stock immediately after a substantial rise or
sell one immediately after a substantial drop.”
An Added Consideration
Something should be said about the significance of average mar-
ket prices as a measure of managerial competence. The shareholder
206 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 221 =====
judges whether his own investment has been successful in terms
both of dividends received and of the long-range trend of the aver-
age market value. The same criteria should logically be applied in
testing the effectiveness of a company’s management and the
soundness of its attitude toward the owners of the business.
This statement may sound like a truism, but it needs to be
emphasized. For as yet there is no accepted technique or approach
by which management is brought to the bar of market opinion. On
the contrary, managements have always insisted that they have no
responsibility of any kind for what happens to the market value of
their shares. It is true, of course, that they are not accountable for
those fluctuations in price which, as we have been insisting, bear no
relationship to underlying conditions and values. But it is only the
lack of alertness and intelligence among the rank and file of share-
holders that permits this immunity to extend to the entire realm of
market quotations, including the permanent establishment of a
depreciated and unsatisfactory price level. Good managements
produce a good average market price, and bad managements pro-
duce bad market prices.*
Fluctuations in Bond Prices
The investor should be aware that even though safety of its prin-
cipal and interest may be unquestioned, a long-term bond could
vary widely in market price in response to changes in interest rates.
In Table 8-1 we give data for various years back to 1902 covering
yields for high-grade corporate and tax-free issues. As individual
illustrations we add the price fluctuations of two representative
railroad issues for a similar period. (These are the Atchison, Topeka
& Santa Fe general mortgage 4s, due 1995, for generations one of
our premier noncallable bond issues, and the Northern Pacific Ry.
3s, due 2047—originally a 150-year maturity!—long a typical Baa-
rated bond.)
Because of their inverse relationship the low yields correspond
to the high prices and vice versa. The decline in the Northern
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 207
* Graham has much more to say on what is now known as “corporate gov-
ernance. ” See the commentary on Chapter 19.

===== PDF PAGE 222 =====
Pacific 3s in 1940 represented mainly doubts as to the safety of the
issue. It is extraordinary that the price recovered to an all-time high
in the next few years, and then lost two-thirds of its price chiefly
because of the rise in general interest rates. There have been star-
tling variations, as well, in the price of even the highest-grade
bonds in the past forty years.
Note that bond prices do not fluctuate in the same (inverse) pro-
portion as the calculated yields, because their fixed maturity value
of 100% exerts a moderating influence. However, for very long
maturities, as in our Northern Pacific example, prices and yields
change at close to the same rate.
Since 1964 record movements in both directions have taken place
in the high-grade bond market. Taking “prime municipals” (tax-
free) as an example, their yield more than doubled, from 3.2% in
January 1965 to 7% in June 1970. Their price index declined, corre-
spondingly, from 110.8 to 67.5. In mid-1970 the yields on high-
grade long-term bonds were higher than at any time in the nearly
200 years of this country’s economic history.* Twenty-five years earlier,
just before our protracted bull market began, bond yields were at
their lowest point in history; long-term municipals returned as little
as 1%, and industrials gave 2.40% compared with the 41⁄2 to 5% for-
merly considered “normal.” Those of us with a long experience on
Wall Street had seen Newton’s law of “action and reaction, equal
and opposite” work itself out repeatedly in the stock market—the
most noteworthy example being the rise in the DJIA from 64 in
1921 to 381 in 1929, followed by a record collapse to 41 in 1932. But
this time the widest pendulum swings took place in the usually
staid and slow-moving array of high-grade bond prices and yields.
Moral: Nothing important on Wall Street can be counted on to
occur exactly in the same way as it happened before. This repre-
208 The Intelligent Investor
* By what Graham called “the rule of opposites, ” in 2002 the yields on long-
term U.S. Treasury bonds hit their lowest levels since 1963. Since bond
yields move inversely to prices, those low yields meant that prices had
risen—making investors most eager to buy just as bonds were at their most
expensive and as their future returns were almost guaranteed to be low. This
provides another proof of Graham’s lesson that the intelligent investor must
refuse to make decisions based on market fluctuations.

===== PDF PAGE 223 =====
1902 low
1920 high
1928 low
1932 high
1946 low
1970 high
1971 close
S & P
AAA
Composite
4.31%
6.40
4.53
5.52
2.44
8.44
7.14
S & P
Municipals
3.11%
5.28
3.90
5.27
1.45
7.06
5.35
1905 high
1920 low
1930 high
1932 low
1936 high
1939–40 low
1946 high
1970 low
1971 close
A. T. & S. F.
4s, 1995
1051⁄2
69
105
75
1171⁄4
991⁄2
141
51
64
Nor. Pac.
3s, 2047
79
491⁄2
73
463⁄4
851⁄4
311⁄2
943⁄4
323⁄4
371⁄4
TABLE 8-1 Fluctuations in Bond Yields, and in Prices of Two Representative Bond Issues, 1902–1970
Bond Yields Bond Prices

===== PDF PAGE 224 =====
sents the first half of our favorite dictum: “ The more it changes, the
more it’s the same thing.”
If it is virtually impossible to make worthwhile predictions
about the price movements of stocks, it is completely impossible to
do so for bonds.* In the old days, at least, one could often find a
useful clue to the coming end of a bull or bear market by studying
the prior action of bonds, but no similar clues were given to a com-
ing change in interest rates and bond prices. Hence the investor
must choose between long-term and short-term bond investments
on the basis chiefly of his personal preferences. If he wants to be
certain that the market values will not decrease, his best choices are
probably U.S. savings bonds, Series E or H, which were described
above, p. 93. Either issue will give him a 5% yield (after the first
year), the Series E for up to 5 5⁄6 years, the Series H for up to ten
years, with a guaranteed resale value of cost or better.
If the investor wants the 7.5% now available on good long-term
corporate bonds, or the 5.3% on tax-free municipals, he must be
prepared to see them fluctuate in price. Banks and insurance com-
panies have the privilege of valuing high-rated bonds of this type
on the mathematical basis of “amortized cost,” which disregards
market prices; it would not be a bad idea for the individual
investor to do something similar.
The price fluctuations of convertible bonds and preferred stocks
are the resultant of three different factors: (1) variations in the 
price of the related common stock, (2) variations in the credit
standing of the company, and (3) variations in general interest
rates. A good many of the convertible issues have been sold by
companies that have credit ratings well below the best. 3 Some of
these were badly affected by the financial squeeze in 1970. As a
result, convertible issues as a whole have been subjected to triply
unsettling influences in recent years, and price variations have
been unusually wide. In the typical case, therefore, the investor
would delude himself if he expected to find in convertible issues
that ideal combination of the safety of a high-grade bond and price
210 The Intelligent Investor
* An updated analysis for today’s readers, explaining recent yields and the
wider variety of bonds and bond funds available today, can be found in the
commentary on Chapter 4.

===== PDF PAGE 225 =====
protection plus a chance to benefit from an advance in the price of
the common.
This may be a good place to make a suggestion about the “long-
term bond of the future.” Why should not the effects of changing
interest rates be divided on some practical and equitable basis
between the borrower and the lender? One possibility would be to
sell long-term bonds with interest payments that vary with an
appropriate index of the going rate. The main results of such an
arrangement would be: (1) the investor’s bond would always have
a principal value of about 100, if the company maintains its credit
rating, but the interest received will vary, say, with the rate offered
on conventional new issues; (2) the corporation would have the
advantages of long-term debt—being spared problems and costs of
frequent renewals of refinancing—but its interest costs would
change from year to year.4
Over the past decade the bond investor has been confronted by
an increasingly serious dilemma: Shall he choose complete stability
of principal value, but with varying and usually low (short-term)
interest rates? Or shall he choose a fixed-interest income, with 
considerable variations (usually downward, it seems) in his princi-
pal value? It would be good for most investors if they could 
compromise between these extremes, and be assured that neither
their interest return nor their principal value will fall below a
stated minimum over, say, a 20-year period. This could be
arranged, without great difficulty, in an appropriate bond contract
of a new form. Important note: In effect the U.S. government has
done a similar thing in its combination of the original savings-
bonds contracts with their extensions at higher interest rates. The
suggestion we make here would cover a longer fixed investment
period than the savings bonds, and would introduce more flexibil-
ity in the interest-rate provisions.*
It is hardly worthwhile to talk about nonconvertible preferred
stocks, since their special tax status makes the safe ones much more
desirable holdings by corporations—e.g., insurance companies—
The Investor and Market Fluctuations 211
* As mentioned in the commentary on Chapters 2 and 4, Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities, or TIPS, are a new and improved version of what Gra-
ham is suggesting here.

===== PDF PAGE 226 =====
than by individuals. The poorer-quality ones almost always fluctu-
ate over a wide range, percentagewise, not too differently from
common stocks. We can offer no other useful remark about them.
Table 16-2 below, p. 406, gives some information on the price
changes of lower-grade nonconvertible preferreds between Decem-
ber 1968 and December 1970. The average decline was 17%, against
11.3% for the S & P composite index of common stocks.
212 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 227 =====
COMMENTARY ON C HAPTER 8
The happiness of those who want to be popular depends on
others; the happiness of those who seek pleasure fluctuates
with moods outside their control; but the happiness of the wise
grows out of their own free acts.
—Marcus Aurelius
DR. JEKYLL AND MR. MARKET
Most of the time, the market is mostly accurate in pricing most stocks.
Millions of buyers and sellers haggling over price do a remarkably
good job of valuing companies—on average. But sometimes, the price
is not right; occasionally, it is very wrong indeed. And at such times,
you need to understand Graham’s image of Mr. Market, probably 
the most brilliant metaphor ever created for explaining how stocks 
can become mispriced. 1 The manic-depressive Mr. Market does not
always price stocks the way an appraiser or a private buyer would
value a business. Instead, when stocks are going up, he happily pays
more than their objective value; and, when they are going down, he is
desperate to dump them for less than their true worth.
Is Mr. Market still around? Is he still bipolar? You bet he is.
On March 17 , 2000, the stock of Inktomi Corp. hit a new high of
$231.625. Since they first came on the market in June 1998, shares 
in the Internet-searching software company had gained roughly
1,900%. Just in the few weeks since December 1999, the stock had
nearly tripled.
What was going on at Inktomi the business that could make Inktomi
the stock so valuable? The answer seems obvious: phenomenally fast
213
1 See Graham’s text, pp. 204–205.

===== PDF PAGE 228 =====
growth. In the three months ending in December 1999, Inktomi sold
$36 million in products and services, more than it had in the entire
year ending in December 1998. If Inktomi could sustain its growth
rate of the previous 12 months for just five more years, its revenues
would explode from $36 million a quarter to $5 billion a month. With
such growth in sight, the faster the stock went up, the farther up it
seemed certain to go.
But in his wild love affair with Inktomi’s stock, Mr. Market was over-
looking something about its business. The company was losing
money—lots of it. It had lost $6 million in the most recent quarter, $24
million in the 12 months before that, and $24 million in the year before
that. In its entire corporate lifetime, Inktomi had never made a dime in
profits. Yet, on March 17 , 2000, Mr. Market valued this tiny business at
a total of $25 billion. (Yes, that’s billion, with a B.)
And then Mr. Market went into a sudden, nightmarish depression.
On September 30, 2002, just two and a half years after hitting
$231.625 per share, Inktomi’s stock closed at 25 cents—collapsing
from a total market value of $25 billion to less than $40 million. Had
Inktomi’s business dried up? Not at all; over the previous 12 months,
the company had generated $113 million in revenues. So what had
changed? Only Mr. Market’s mood: In early 2000, investors were 
so wild about the Internet that they priced Inktomi’s shares at 250
times the company’s revenues. Now, however, they would pay only
0.35 times its revenues. Mr. Market had morphed from Dr. Jekyll to Mr.
Hyde and was ferociously trashing every stock that had made a fool
out of him.
But Mr. Market was no more justified in his midnight rage than he
had been in his manic euphoria. On December 23, 2002, Yahoo! Inc.
announced that it would buy Inktomi for $1.65 per share. That was
nearly seven times Inktomi’s stock price on September 30. History will
probably show that Yahoo! got a bargain. When Mr. Market makes
stocks so cheap, it’s no wonder that entire companies get bought
right out from under him.2
214 Commentary on Chapter 8
2 As Graham noted in a classic series of articles in 1932, the Great Depres-
sion caused the shares of dozens of companies to drop below the value of
their cash and other liquid assets, making them “worth more dead than
alive. ”

===== PDF PAGE 229 =====
THINK FOR YOURSELF
Would you willingly allow a certifiable lunatic to come by at least five
times a week to tell you that you should feel exactly the way he feels?
Would you ever agree to be euphoric just because he is—or miserable
just because he thinks you should be? Of course not. You’d insist on
your right to take control of your own emotional life, based on your
experiences and your beliefs. But, when it comes to their financial
lives, millions of people let Mr. Market tell them how to feel and what to
do—despite the obvious fact that, from time to time, he can get nuttier
than a fruitcake.
In 1999, when Mr. Market was squealing with delight, American
employees directed an average of 8.6% of their paychecks into their
401(k) retirement plans. By 2002, after Mr. Market had spent three
years stuffing stocks into black garbage bags, the average contribu-
tion rate had dropped by nearly one-quarter, to just 7%. 3 The cheaper
stocks got, the less eager people became to buy them—because they
were imitating Mr. Market, instead of thinking for themselves.
The intelligent investor shouldn’t ignore Mr. Market entirely. Instead,
you should do business with him—but only to the extent that it serves
your interests. Mr. Market’s job is to provide you with prices; your job
is to decide whether it is to your advantage to act on them. You do not
have to trade with him just because he constantly begs you to.
By refusing to let Mr. Market be your master, you transform him into
your servant. After all, even when he seems to be destroying values,
he is creating them elsewhere. In 1999, the Wilshire 5000 index—the
broadest measure of U.S. stock performance—gained 23.8%, pow-
ered by technology and telecommunications stocks. But 3,743 of the
7 ,234 stocks in the Wilshire index went down in value even as the
average was rising. While those high-tech and telecom stocks were
hotter than the hood of a race car on an August afternoon, thousands
of “Old Economy” shares were frozen in the mud—getting cheaper and
cheaper.
The stock of CMGI, an “incubator” or holding company for Internet
Commentary on Chapter 8 215
3 News release, The Spectrem Group, “Plan Sponsors Are Losing the Battle
to Prevent Declining Participation and Deferrals into Defined Contribution
Plans, ” October 25, 2002.

===== PDF PAGE 230 =====
Final value
of $1,000
invested
Company Business 1999 2000 2001 2002 1/1/1999
Angelica industrial uniforms –43.7 1.8 19.3 94.1 1,328
Ball Corp. metal & plastic packaging –12.7 19.2 55.3 46.0 2,359
Checkers Drive-In Restaurants fast food –45.5 63.9 66.2 2.1 1,517
Family Dollar Stores discount retailer –25.1 33.0 41.1 5.0 1,476
International Game Technology gambling equipment –16.3 136.1 42.3 11.2 3,127
J B Hunt Transportation trucking –39.1 21.9 38.0 26.3 1,294
Jos. A. Bank Clothiers apparel –62.5 50.0 57.1 201.6 2,665
Lockheed Martin defense & aerospace –46.9 58.0 39.0 24.7 1,453
Pier 1 Imports home furnishings –33.2 63.9 70.5 10.3 2,059
UST Inc. snuff tobacco –23.5 21.6 32.2 1.0 1,241
Wilshire Internet Index 139.1 –55.5 –46.2 –45.0 315
Wilshire 5000 index (total stock market) 23.8 –10.9 –11.0 –20.8 778
Sources: Aronson + Johnson + Ortiz, L.P .; www.wilshire.com
Total Return
FIGURE 8-1 From Stinkers to Stars

===== PDF PAGE 231 =====
start-up firms, went up an astonishing 939.9% in 1999. Meanwhile, Berk-
shire Hathaway—the holding company through which Graham’s greatest
disciple, Warren Buffett, owns such Old Economy stalwarts as Coca-
Cola, Gillette, and the Washington Post Co.—dropped by 24.9%.4
But then, as it so often does, the market had a sudden mood
swing. Figure 8-1 offers a sampling of how the stinkers of 1999 be-
came the stars of 2000 through 2002.
As for those two holding companies, CMGI went on to lose 96% in
2000, another 70.9% in 2001, and still 39.8% more in 2002—a cumulative
loss of 99.3%. Berkshire Hathaway went up 26.6% in 2000 and 6.5% in
2001, then had a slight 3.8% loss in 2002—a cumulative gain of 30%.
CAN YOU BEAT THE PROS AT THEIR OWN GAME?
One of Graham’s most powerful insights is this: “The investor who
permits himself to be stampeded or unduly worried by unjustified mar-
ket declines in his holdings is perversely transforming his basic advan-
tage into a basic disadvantage. ”
What does Graham mean by those words “basic advantage”? He
means that the intelligent individual investor has the full freedom to
choose whether or not to follow Mr. Market. You have the luxury of
being able to think for yourself.5
Commentary on Chapter 8 217
4 A few months later, on March 10, 2000—the very day that NASDAQ hit its all-
time high—online trading pundit James J. Cramer wrote that he had “repeat-
edly” been tempted in recent days to sell Berkshire Hathaway short, a bet that
Buffett’s stock had farther to fall. With a vulgar thrust of his rhetorical pelvis,
Cramer even declared that Berkshire’s shares were “ripe for the banging. ” That
same day, market strategist Ralph Acampora of Prudential Securities asked,
“Norfolk Southern or Cisco Systems: Where do you want to be in the future?”
Cisco, a key to tomorrow’s Internet superhighway, seemed to have it all over
Norfolk Southern, part of yesterday’s railroad system. (Over the next year, Nor-
folk Southern gained 35%, while Cisco lost 70%.)
5 When asked what keeps most individual investors from succeeding, Gra-
ham had a concise answer: “The primary cause of failure is that they pay too
much attention to what the stock market is doing currently. ” See “Benjamin
Graham: Thoughts on Security Analysis” [transcript of lecture at Northeast
Missouri State University Business School, March, 1972], Financial History
magazine, no. 42, March, 1991, p. 8.

===== PDF PAGE 232 =====
The typical money manager, however, has no choice but to mimic Mr.
Market’s every move—buying high, selling low, marching almost mind-
lessly in his erratic footsteps. Here are some of the handicaps mutual-
fund managers and other professional investors are saddled with:
• With billions of dollars under management, they must gravitate
toward the biggest stocks—the only ones they can buy in the 
multimillion-dollar quantities they need to fill their portfolios. Thus
many funds end up owning the same few overpriced giants.
• Investors tend to pour more money into funds as the market rises.
The managers use that new cash to buy more of the stocks they
already own, driving prices to even more dangerous heights.
• If fund investors ask for their money back when the market drops,
the managers may need to sell stocks to cash them out. Just as
the funds are forced to buy stocks at inflated prices in a rising
market, they become forced sellers as stocks get cheap again.
• Many portfolio managers get bonuses for beating the market, so
they obsessively measure their returns against benchmarks like
the S & P 500 index. If a company gets added to an index, hun-
dreds of funds compulsively buy it. (If they don’t, and that stock
then does well, the managers look foolish; on the other hand, if
they buy it and it does poorly, no one will blame them.)
• Increasingly, fund managers are expected to specialize. Just as in
medicine the general practitioner has given way to the pediatric
allergist and the geriatric otolaryngologist, fund managers must
buy only “small growth” stocks, or only “mid-sized value” stocks,
or nothing but “large blend” stocks.6 If a company gets too big, or
too small, or too cheap, or an itty bit too expensive, the fund has
to sell it—even if the manager loves the stock.
So there’s no reason you can’t do as well as the pros. What you
cannot do (despite all the pundits who say you can) is to “beat the
pros at their own game. ” The pros can’t even win their own game!
Why should you want to play it at all? If you follow their rules, you will
lose—since you will end up as much a slave to Mr. Market as the pro-
fessionals are.
218 Commentary on Chapter 8
6 Never mind what these terms mean, or are supposed to mean. While in
public these classifications are treated with the utmost respect, in private
most people in the investment business regard them with the contempt nor-
mally reserved for jokes that aren’t funny.

===== PDF PAGE 233 =====
Instead, recognize that investing intelligently is about controlling
the controllable. You can’t control whether the stocks or funds you buy
will outperform the market today, next week, this month, or this year; in
the short run, your returns will always be hostage to Mr. Market and
his whims. But you can control:
• your brokerage costs, by trading rarely, patiently, and cheaply
• your ownership costs, by refusing to buy mutual funds with
excessive annual expenses
• your expectations, by using realism, not fantasy, to forecast your
returns7
• your risk, by deciding how much of your total assets to put at
hazard in the stock market, by diversifying, and by rebalancing
• your tax bills, by holding stocks for at least one year and, when-
ever possible, for at least five years, to lower your capital-gains lia-
bility
• and, most of all, your own behavior.
If you listen to financial TV, or read most market columnists, you’d
think that investing is some kind of sport, or a war, or a struggle for
survival in a hostile wilderness. 
But investing isn’t about beating oth-
ers at their game. It’s about controlling yourself at your own game.
The challenge for the intelligent investor is not to find the stocks that
will go up the most and down the least, but rather to prevent yourself
from being your own worst enemy—from buying high just because Mr.
Market says “Buy!” and from selling low just because Mr. Market says
“Sell!”
If you investment horizon is long—at least 25 or 30 years—there is
only one sensible approach: Buy every month, automatically, and
whenever else you can spare some money. The single best choice for
this lifelong holding is a total stock-market index fund. Sell only when
you need the cash (for a psychological boost, clip out and sign your
“Investment Owner’s Contract”—which you can find on p. 225).
To be an intelligent investor, you must also refuse to judge your
financial success by how a bunch of total strangers are doing. You’re
not one penny poorer if someone in Dubuque or Dallas or Denver
Commentary on Chapter 8 219
7 See the brilliant column by Walter Updegrave, “Keep It Real, ” Money, Feb-
ruary, 2002, pp. 53–56.

===== PDF PAGE 234 =====
beats the S & P 500 and you don’t. No one’s gravestone reads “HE
BEAT THE MARKET. ”
I once interviewed a group of retirees in Boca Raton, one of
Florida’s wealthiest retirement communities. I asked these people—
mostly in their seventies—if they had beaten the market over their
investing lifetimes. Some said yes, some said no; most weren’t sure.
Then one man said, “Who cares? All I know is, my investments earned
enough for me to end up in Boca. ”
Could there be a more perfect answer? After all, the whole point of
investing is not to earn more money than average, but to earn enough
money to meet your own needs. The best way to measure your invest-
ing success is not by whether you’re beating the market but by
whether you’ve put in place a financial plan and a behavioral discipline
that are likely to get you where you want to go. In the end, what mat-
ters isn’t crossing the finish line before anybody else but just making
sure that you do cross it.8
YOUR MONEY AND YOUR BRAIN
Why, then, do investors find Mr. Market so seductive? It turns out that
our brains are hardwired to get us into investing trouble; humans are
pattern-seeking animals. Psychologists have shown that if you present
people with a random sequence—and tell them that it’s unpre-
dictable—they will nevertheless insist on trying to guess what’s coming
next. Likewise, we “know” that the next roll of the dice will be a seven,
that a baseball player is due for a base hit, that the next winning num-
ber in the Powerball lottery will definitely be 4-27-9-16-42-10—and
that this hot little stock is the next Microsoft.
Groundbreaking new research in neuroscience shows that our
brains are designed to perceive trends even where they might not
exist. After an event occurs just two or three times in a row, regions of
the human brain called the anterior cingulate and nucleus accumbens
automatically anticipate that it will happen again. If it does repeat, a
natural chemical called dopamine is released, flooding your brain with
a soft euphoria. Thus, if a stock goes up a few times in a row, you
reflexively expect it to keep going—and your brain chemistry changes
220 Commentary on Chapter 8
8 See Jason Zweig, “Did You Beat the Market?” Money, January, 2000, pp.
55–58.

===== PDF PAGE 235 =====
as the stock rises, giving you a “natural high. ” You effectively become
addicted to your own predictions.
But when stocks drop, that financial loss fires up your amygdala—
the part of the brain that processes fear and anxiety and generates the
famous “fight or flight” response that is common to all cornered ani-
mals. Just as you can’t keep your heart rate from rising if a fire alarm
goes off, just as you can’t avoid flinching if a rattlesnake slithers onto
your hiking path, you can’t help feeling fearful when stock prices are
plunging.9
In fact, the brilliant psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tver-
sky have shown that the pain of financial loss is more than twice as
intense as the pleasure of an equivalent gain. Making $1,000 on a
stock feels great—but a $1,000 loss wields an emotional wallop more
than twice as powerful. Losing money is so painful that many people,
terrified at the prospect of any further loss, sell out near the bottom or
refuse to buy more.
That helps explain why we fixate on the raw magnitude of a market
decline and forget to put the loss in proportion. So, if a TV reporter
hollers, “The market is plunging—the Dow is down 100 points! ” most
people instinctively shudder. But, at the Dow’s recent level of 8,000,
that’s a drop of just 1.2%. Now think how ridiculous it would sound if,
on a day when it’s 81 degrees outside, the TV weatherman shrieked,
“The temperature is plunging—it’s dropped from 81 degrees to 80
degrees!” That, too, is a 1.2% drop. When you forget to view chang-
ing market prices in percentage terms, it’s all too easy to panic over
minor vibrations. (If you have decades of investing ahead of you,
there’s a better way to visualize the financial news broadcasts; see the
sidebar on p. 222.)
In the late 1990s, many people came to feel that they were in the
dark unless they checked the prices of their stocks several times a
day. 
But, as Graham puts it, the typical investor “would be better off if
his stocks had no market quotation at all, for he would then be spared
the mental anguish caused him by other persons’ mistakes of judg-
Commentary on Chapter 8 221
9 The neuroscience of investing is explored in Jason Zweig, “Are You Wired 
for Wealth?” Money, October, 2002, pp. 74–83, also available at http://
money.cnn.com/2002/09/25/pf/investing/agenda_brain _short/index.htm. See
also Jason Zweig, “The Trouble with Humans, ” Money, November, 2000, pp.
67–70.

===== PDF PAGE 236 =====
222 Commentary on Chapter 8
NEWS YOU COULD USE
Stocks are crashing, so you turn on the television to catch the
latest market news. But instead of CNBC or CNN, imagine that
you can tune in to the Benjamin Graham Financial Network. On
BGFN, the audio doesn’t capture that famous sour clang of the
market’s closing bell; the video doesn’t home in on brokers
scurrying across the floor of the stock exchange like angry
rodents. Nor does BGFN run any footage of investors gasping
on frozen sidewalks as red arrows whiz overhead on electronic
stock tickers.
Instead, the image that fills your TV screen is the facade of
the New York Stock Exchange, festooned with a huge banner
reading: “SALE! 50% OFF!” As intro music, Bachman-Turner
Overdrive can be heard blaring a few bars of their old barn-
burner, “You Ain’t Seen Nothin’ Yet. ” Then the anchorman
announces brightly, “Stocks became more attractive yet again
today, as the Dow dropped another 2.5% on heavy volume—the
fourth day in a row that stocks have gotten cheaper. Tech
investors fared even better, as leading companies like Microsoft
lost nearly 5% on the day, making them even more affordable.
That comes on top of the good news of the past year, in which
stocks have already lost 50%, putting them at bargain levels not
seen in years. And some prominent analysts are optimistic that
prices may drop still further in the weeks and months to come. ”
The newscast cuts over to market strategist Ignatz Anderson
of the Wall Street firm of Ketchum & Skinner, who says, “My
forecast is for stocks to lose another 15% by June. I’m cau-
tiously optimistic that if everything goes well, stocks could lose
25%, maybe more.”
“Let’s hope Ignatz Anderson is right,” the anchor says cheer-
ily. “ Falling stock prices would be fabulous news for any
investor with a very long horizon. And now over to Wally Wood
for our exclusive AccuWeather forecast. ”

===== PDF PAGE 237 =====
ment. ” If, after checking the value of your stock portfolio at 1:24 P.M.,
you feel compelled to check it all over again at 1:37 P.M., ask yourself
these questions:
• Did I call a real-estate agent to check the market price of my
house at 1:24 P.M.? Did I call back at 1:37 P.M.?
• If I had, would the price have changed? If it did, would I have
rushed to sell my house?
• By not checking, or even knowing, the market price of my house
from minute to minute, do I prevent its value from rising over time?10
The only possible answer to these questions is of course not! And
you should view your portfolio the same way. Over a 10- or 20- or 30-
year investment horizon, Mr. Market’s daily dipsy-doodles simply do not
matter. In any case, for anyone who will be investing for years to come,
falling stock prices are good news, not bad, since they enable you to
buy more for less money. The longer and further stocks fall, and the
more steadily you keep buying as they drop, the more money you will
make in the end—if you remain steadfast until the end. Instead of fear-
ing a bear market, you should embrace it. The intelligent investor
should be perfectly comfortable owning a stock or mutual fund even if
the stock market stopped supplying daily prices for the next 10 years.11
Paradoxically, “you will be much more in control, ” explains neurosci-
entist Antonio Damasio, “if you realize how much you are not in con-
trol. ” By acknowledging your biological tendency to buy high and sell
low, you can admit the need to dollar-cost average, rebalance, and
sign an investment contract. By putting much of your portfolio on per-
manent autopilot, you can fight the prediction addiction, focus on your
long-term financial goals, and tune out Mr. Market’s mood swings.
Commentary on Chapter 8 223
10 It’s also worth asking whether you could enjoy living in your house if its
market price was reported to the last penny every day in the newspapers
and on TV.
11 In a series of remarkable experiments in the late 1980s, a psychologist at
Columbia and Harvard, Paul Andreassen, showed that investors who
received frequent news updates on their stocks earned half the returns of
investors who got no news at all. See Jason Zweig, “Here’s How to Use the
News and Tune Out the Noise, ” Money, July, 1998, pp. 63–64.

===== PDF PAGE 238 =====
WHEN MR. MARKET GIVES YOU LEMONS,
MAKE LEMONADE
Although Graham teaches that you should buy when Mr. Market is
yelling “sell, ” there’s one exception the intelligent investor needs to
understand. 
Selling into a bear market can make sense if it creates a
tax windfall. The U.S. Internal Revenue Code allows you to use your
realized losses (any declines in value that you lock in by selling your
shares) to offset up to $3,000 in ordinary income. 12 Let’s say you
bought 200 shares of Coca-Cola stock in January 2000 for $60 a
share—a total investment of $12,000. By year-end 2002, the stock
was down to $44 a share, or $8,800 for your lot—a loss of $3,200.
You could have done what most people do—either whine about
your loss, or sweep it under the rug and pretend it never happened.
Or you could have taken control. Before 2002 ended, you could have
sold all your Coke shares, locking in the $3,200 loss. Then, after wait-
ing 31 days to comply with IRS rules, you would buy 200 shares of
Coke all over again. The result: You would be able to reduce your tax-
able income by $3,000 in 2002, and you could use the remaining
$200 loss to offset your income in 2003. And better yet, you would
still own a company whose future you believe in—but now you would
own it for almost one-third less than you paid the first time.13
With Uncle Sam subsidizing your losses, it can make sense to sell
and lock in a loss. If Uncle Sam wants to make Mr. Market look logical
by comparison, who are we to complain?
224 Commentary on Chapter 8
12 Federal tax law is subject to constant change. The example of Coca-Cola
stock given here is valid under the provisions of the U.S. tax code as it stood
in early 2003.
13 This example assumes that the investor had no realized capital gains in
2002 and did not reinvest any Coke dividends. Tax swaps are not to be
undertaken lightly, since they can be mishandled easily. Before doing a tax
swap, read IRS Publication 550 (www.irs.gov/pub/irspdf/p550.pdf). A
good guide to managing your investment taxes is Robert N. Gordon with
Jan M. Rosen, Wall Street Secrets for Tax-Efficient Investing (Bloomberg
Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2001). Finally, before you pull the trigger, con-
sult a professional tax adviser.

===== PDF PAGE 239 =====
INVESTMENT OWNER’S CONTRACT
I, _____________ ___________________, hereby state that I am an investor
who is seeking to accumulate wealth for many years into the future.
I know that there will be many times when I will be tempted to invest in
stocks or bonds because they have gone (or “are going”) up in price, and
other times when I will be tempted to sell my investments because they have
gone (or “are going”) down.
I hereby declare my refusal to let a herd of strangers make my financial
decisions for me. I further make a solemn commitment never to invest
because the stock market has gone up, and never to sell because it has
gone down. Instead, I will invest $______.00 per month, every month,
through an automatic investment plan or “dollar-cost averaging program, ”
into the following mutual fund(s) or diversified portfolio(s):
_________________________________,
_________________________________,
_________________________________.
I will also invest additional amounts whenever I can afford to spare the
cash (and can afford to lose it in the short run).
I hereby declare that I will hold each of these investments continually
through at least the following date (which must be a minimum of 10 years
after the date of this contact): _________________ _____, 20__. The only
exceptions allowed under the terms of this contract are a sudden, pressing
need for cash, like a health-care emergency or the loss of my job, or a
planned expenditure like a housing down payment or a tuition bill.
I am, by signing below, stating my intention not only to abide by the terms
of this contract, but to re-read this document whenever I am tempted to sell
any of my investments.
This contract is valid only when signed by at least one witness, and must
be kept in a safe place that is easily accessible for future reference.
Signed: Date:
_____________ ___________________   _______________ ____, 20__
Witnesses:
_____________ ___________________
_____________ ___________________
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 14 | PDF PAGES 361-389 =====

===== PDF PAGE 361 =====
CHAPTER 14
Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor
It is time to turn to some broader applications of the techniques of
security analysis. Since we have already described in general terms
the investment policies recommended for our two categories of
investors,* it would be logical for us now to indicate how security
analysis comes into play in order to implement these policies. The
defensive investor who follows our suggestions will purchase only
high-grade bonds plus a diversified list of leading common stocks.
He is to make sure that the price at which he bought the latter is
not unduly high as judged by applicable standards.
In setting up this diversified list he has a choice of two
approaches, the DJIA-type of portfolio and the quantitatively-
tested portfolio. In the first he acquires a true cross-section sample
of the leading issues, which will include both some favored growth
companies, whose shares sell at especially high multipliers, and
also less popular and less expensive enterprises. This could be
done, most simply perhaps, by buying the same amounts of all
thirty of the issues in the Dow-Jones Industrial Average (DJIA). Ten
shares of each, at the 900 level for the average, would cost an
aggregate of about $16,000. 1 On the basis of the past record he
might expect approximately the same future results by buying
shares of several representative investment funds.†
His second choice would be to apply a set of standards to each
347
* Graham describes his recommended investment policies in Chapters 4
through 7 .
† As we have discussed in the commentaries on Chapters 5 and 9, today’s
defensive investor can achieve this goal simply by buying a low-cost index
fund, ideally one that tracks the return of the total U.S. stock market.

===== PDF PAGE 362 =====
purchase, to make sure that he obtains (1) a minimum of quality in
the past performance and current financial position of the com-
pany, and also (2) a minimum of quantity in terms of earnings and
assets per dollar of price. At the close of the previous chapter we
listed seven such quality and quantity criteria suggested for the
selection of specific common stocks. Let us describe them in order.
1. Adequate Size of the Enterprise
All our minimum figures must be arbitrary and especially in the
matter of size required. Our idea is to exclude small companies
which may be subject to more than average vicissitudes especially
in the industrial field. (There are often good possibilities in such
enterprises but we do not consider them suited to the needs of the
defensive investor.) Let us use round amounts: not less than $100
million of annual sales for an industrial company and, not less than
$50 million of total assets for a public utility.
2. A Sufficiently Strong Financial Condition
For industrial companies current assets should be at least twice
current liabilities—a so-called two-to-one current ratio. Also, long-
term debt should not exceed the net current assets (or “working
capital”). For public utilities the debt should not exceed twice the
stock equity (at book value).
3. Earnings Stability
Some earnings for the common stock in each of the past ten
years.
4. Dividend Record
Uninterrupted payments for at least the past 20 years.
5. Earnings Growth
A minimum increase of at least one-third in per-share earnings
in the past ten years using three-year averages at the beginning
and end.
348 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 363 =====
6. Moderate Price/Earnings Ratio
Current price should not be more than 15 times average earn-
ings of the past three years.
7. Moderate Ratio of Price to Assets
Current price should not be more than 11⁄2 times the book value last
reported. However, a multiplier of earnings below 15 could justify a
correspondingly higher multiplier of assets. As a rule of thumb we
suggest that the product of the multiplier times the ratio of price to
book value should not exceed 22.5. (This figure corresponds to 15
times earnings and 11⁄2 times book value. It would admit an issue sell-
ing at only 9 times earnings and 2.5 times asset value, etc.)
General Comments: These requirements are set up especially
for the needs and the temperament of defensive investors. They
will eliminate the great majority of common stocks as candidates
for the portfolio, and in two opposite ways. On the one hand they
will exclude companies that are (1) too small, (2) in relatively weak
financial condition, (3) with a deficit stigma in their ten-year
record, and (4) not having a long history of continuous dividends.
Of these tests the most severe under recent financial conditions are
those of financial strength. A considerable number of our large and
formerly strongly entrenched enterprises have weakened their cur-
rent ratio or overexpanded their debt, or both, in recent years.
Our last two criteria are exclusive in the opposite direction, by
demanding more earnings and more assets per dollar of price than
the popular issues will supply. This is by no means the standard
viewpoint of financial analysts; in fact most will insist that even
conservative investors should be prepared to pay generous prices
for stocks of the choice companies. We have expounded our con-
trary view above; it rests largely on the absence of an adequate fac-
tor of safety when too large a portion of the price must depend on
ever-increasing earnings in the future. The reader will have to
decide this important question for himself—after weighing the
arguments on both sides.
We have nonetheless opted for the inclusion of a modest
requirement of growth over the past decade. Without it the typical
company would show retrogression, at least in terms of profit per
Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor 349

===== PDF PAGE 364 =====
dollar of invested capital. There is no reason for the defensive
investor to include such companies—though if the price is low
enough they could qualify as bargain opportunities.
The suggested maximum figure of 15 times earnings might well
result in a typical portfolio with an average multiplier of, say, 12 to
13 times. Note that in February 1972 American Tel. & Tel. sold at 11
times its three-year (and current) earnings, and Standard Oil of
California at less than 10 times latest earnings. Our basic recom-
mendation is that the stock portfolio, when acquired, should have
an overall earnings/price ratio—the reverse of the P/E ratio—at
least as high as the current high-grade bond rate. This would mean
a P/E ratio no higher than 13.3 against an AA bond yield of 7.5%.*
Application of Our Criteria to the DJIA at the End of 1970
All of our suggested criteria were satisfied by the DJIA issues at
the end of 1970, but two of them just barely. Here is a survey based
on the closing price of 1970 and the relevant figures. (The basic
data for each company are shown in Tables 14-1 and 14-2.)
1. Size is more than ample for each company.
2. Financial condition is adequate in the aggregate, but not for
every company.2
3. Some dividend has been paid by every company since at least
1940. Five of the dividend records go back to the last century.
350 The Intelligent Investor
* In early 2003, the yield on 10-year, AA-rated corporate bonds was around
4.6%, suggesting—by Graham’s formula—that a stock portfolio should have
an earnings-to-price ratio at least that high. Taking the inverse of that num-
ber (by dividing 4.6 into 100), we can derive a “suggested maximum” P/E
ratio of 21.7 . At the beginning of this paragraph Graham recommends that
the “average” stock be priced about 20% below the “maximum” ratio. That
suggests that—in general—Graham would consider stocks selling at no more
than 17 times their three-year average earnings to be potentially attractive
given today’s interest rates and market conditions. As of December 31,
2002, more than 200—or better than 40%—of the stocks in the S & P 500-
stock index had three-year average P/E ratios of 17 .0 or lower. Updated AA
bond yields can be found at www.bondtalk.com.

===== PDF PAGE 365 =====
Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor 351
TABLE 14-1 Basic Data on 30 Stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average at September 30, 1971
“Earnings Per Share”a
Price Ave. Ave. Net
Sept. 30, Sept. 30, 1968– 1958– Div. Asset Current
1971 1971 1970 1960 Since Value Div.
Allied Chemical 32 1⁄2 1.40 1.82 2.14 1887 26.02 1.20
Aluminum Co. of Am. 45 1⁄2 4.25 5.18 2.08 1939 55.01 1.80
Amer. Brands 43 1⁄2 4.32 3.69 2.24 1905 13.46 2.10
Amer. Can 33 1⁄4 2.68 3.76 2.42 1923 40.01 2.20
Amer. Tel. & Tel. 43 4.03 3.91 2.52 1881 45.47 2.60
Anaconda 15 2.06 3.90 2.17 1936 54.28 none
Bethlehem Steel 25 1⁄2 2.64 3.05 2.62 1939 44.62 1.20
Chrysler 28 1⁄2 1.05 2.72 (0.13) 1926 42.40 0.60
DuPont 154 6.31 7.32 8.09 1904 55.22 5.00
Eastman Kodak 87 2.45 2.44 0.72 1902 13.70 1.32
General Electric 61 1⁄4 2.63 1.78 1.37 1899 14.92 1.40
General Foods 34 2.34 2.23 1.13 1922 14.13 1.40
General Motors 83 3.33 4.69 2.94 1915 33.39 3.40
Goodyear 33 1⁄2 2.11 2.01 1.04 1937 18.49 0.85
Inter. Harvester 28 1⁄2 1.16 2.30 1.87 1910 42.06 1.40
Inter. Nickel 31 2.27 2.10 0.94 1934 14.53 1.00
Inter. Paper 33 1.46 2.22 1.76 1946 23.68 1.50
Johns-Manville 39 2.02 2.33 1.62 1935 24.51 1.20
Owens-Illinois 52 3.89 3.69 2.24 1907 43.75 1.35
Procter & Gamble 71 2.91 2.33 1.02 1891 15.41 1.50
Sears Roebuck 68 1⁄2 3.19 2.87 1.17 1935 23.97 1.55
Std. Oil of Calif. 56 5.78 5.35 3.17 1912 54.79 2.80
Std. Oil of N.J. 72 6.51 5.88 2.90 1882 48.95 3.90
Swift & Co. 42 2.56 1.66 1.33 1934 26.74 0.70
Texaco 32 3.24 2.96 1.34 1903 23.06 1.60
Union Carbide 43 1⁄2 2.59 2.76 2.52 1918 29.64 2.00
United Aircraft 30 1⁄2 3.13 4.35 2.79 1936 47.00 1.80
U. S. Steel 29 1⁄2 3.53 3.81 4.85 1940 65.54 1.60
Westinghouse 96 1⁄2 3.26 3.44 2.26 1935 33.67 1.80
Woolworth 49 2.47 2.38 1.35 1912 25.47 1.20
a Adjusted for stock dividends and stock splits.
b Typically for the 12 months ended June 30, 1971.

===== PDF PAGE 366 =====
Allied Chemical 18.3 /H11003 18.0 /H11003 3.7% (–15.0%) 2.1 /H11003 74% 125%
Aluminum Co. of Am. 10.7 8.8 4.0 149.0% 2.7 51 84
Amer. Brands 10.1 11.8 5.1 64.7 2.1 138 282
Amer. Can 12.4 8.9 6.6 52.5 2.1 91 83
Amer. Tel. & Tel. 10.8 11.0 6.0 55.2 1.1 —c 94
Anaconda 5.7 3.9 — 80.0 2.9 80 28
Bethlehem Steel 12.4 8.1 4.7 16.4 1.7 68 58
Chrysler 27.0 10.5 2.1 —d 1.4 78 67
DuPont 24.5 21.0 3.2 (–9.0) 3.6 609 280
Eastman Kodak 35.5 35.6 1.5 238.9 2.4 1764 635
General Electric 23.4 34.4 2.3 29.9 1.3 89 410
General Foods 14.5 15.2 4.1 97.3 1.6 254 240
General Motors 24.4 17.6 4.1 59.5 1.9 1071 247
Goodyear 15.8 16.7 2.5 93.3 2.1 129 80
Inter. Harvester 24.5 12.4 4.9 23.0 2.2 191 66
Inter. Nickel 13.6 16.2 3.2 123.4 2.5 131 213
TABLE 14-2 Significant Ratios of DJIA Stocks at September 30, 1971
Price to Earnings
Earnings
Growth
1968–1970
vs.
1958–1960Sept. 1971 1968–1970
Current
Div.
Yield
Price/
Net Asset
ValueCA/CLa
NCA/
Debtb

===== PDF PAGE 367 =====
Inter. Paper 22.5 14.0 4.6 26.1 2.2 62 139
Johns-Manville 19.3 16.8 3.0 43.8 2.6 — 158
Owens-Illinois 13.2 14.0 2.6 64.7 1.6 51 118
Procter & Gamble 24.2 31.6 2.1 128.4 2.4 400 460
Sears Roebuck 21.4 23.8 1.7 145.3 1.6 322 285
Std. Oil of Calif. 9.7 10.5 5.0 68.8 1.5 79 102
Std. Oil of N.J. 11.0 12.2 5.4 102.8 1.5 94 115
Swift & Co. 16.4 25.5 1.7 24.8 2.4 138 158
Texaco 9.9 10.8 5.0 120.9 1.7 128 138
Union Carbide 16.6 15.8 4.6 9.5 2.2 86 146
United Aircraft 9.7 7.0 5.9 55.9 1.5 155 65
U. S. Steel 8.3 6.7 5.4 (–21.5) 1.7 51 63
Westinghouse El. 29.5 28.0 1.9 52.2 1.8 145 2.86
Woolworth 19.7 20.5 2.4 76.3 1.8 185 1.90
a Figures taken for fiscal 1970 year-end co. results.
b Figures taken from Moody’s Industrial Manual (1971).
c Debit balance for NCA. (NCA = net current assets.)
d Reported deficit for 1958–1960.

===== PDF PAGE 368 =====
4. The aggregate earnings have been quite stable in the past
decade. None of the companies reported a deficit during the
prosperous period 1961–69, but Chrysler showed a small
deficit in 1970.
5. The total growth—comparing three-year averages a decade
apart—was 77%, or about 6% per year. But five of the firms did
not grow by one-third.
6. The ratio of year-end price to three-year average earnings was
839 to $55.5 or 15 to 1—right at our suggested upper limit.
7. The ratio of price to net asset value was 839 to 562—also just
within our suggested limit of 11⁄2 to 1.
If, however, we wish to apply the same seven criteria to each
individual company, we would find that only five of them would
meet all our requirements. These would be: American Can, Ameri-
can Tel. & Tel., Anaconda, Swift, and Woolworth. The totals for
these five appear in Table 14-3. Naturally they make a much better
statistical showing than the DJIA as a whole, except in the past
growth rate.3
Our application of specific criteria to this select group of indus-
trial stocks indicates that the number meeting every one of our
tests will be a relatively small percentage of all listed industrial
issues. We hazard the guess that about 100 issues of this sort could
have been found in the Standard & Poor’s Stock Guide at the end of
1970, just about enough to provide the investor with a satisfactory
range of personal choice.*
The Public-Utility “Solution”
If we turn now to the field of public-utility stocks we find a
much more comfortable and inviting situation for the investor.†
354 The Intelligent Investor
* An easy-to-use online stock screener that can sort the stocks in the S & P
500 by most of Graham’s criteria is available at: www.quicken.com/
investments/stocks/search/full.
† When Graham wrote, only one major mutual fund specializing in utility
stocks—Franklin Utilities—was widely available. Today there are more than
30. Graham could not have anticipated the financial havoc wrought by can-

===== PDF PAGE 369 =====
TABLE 14-3 DJIA Issues Meeting Certain Investment Criteria at the End of 1970
American American Average, 
Can Tel. & Tel. Anaconda Swift Woolworth 5 Companies
Price Dec. 31, 1970 393⁄4 487⁄8 21 301⁄8 361⁄2
Price/earnings, 1970 11.0 /H11003 12.3 /H11003 6.7 /H11003 13.5 /H11003 14.4 /H11003 11.6 /H11003
Price/earnings, 3 years 10.5 /H11003 12.5 /H11003 5.4 /H11003 18.1 /H11003b 15.1 /H11003 12.3 /H11003
Price/book value 99% 108% 38% 113% 148% 112%
Current assets/current liabilities 2.2 /H11003 n.a. 2.9 /H11003 2.3 /H11003 1.8 /H11003c 2.3 /H11003
Net current assets/debt 110% n.a. 120% 141% 190% 140%
Stability indexa 85 100 72 77 99 86
Growtha 55% 53% 78% 25% 73% 57%
a See definition on p. 338.
b In view of Swift’s good showing in the poor year 1970, we waive the 1968–1970 deficiency here.
c The small deficiency here below 2 to 1 was offset by margin for additional debt financing.
n.a. = not applicable. American Tel. & Tel.’s debt was less than its stock equity.

===== PDF PAGE 370 =====
Here the vast majority of issues appear to be cut out, by their per-
formance record and their price ratios, in accordance with the
defensive investor’s needs as we judge them. We exclude one crite-
rion from our tests of public-utility stocks—namely, the ratio of
current assets to current liabilities. The working-capital factor takes
care of itself in this industry as part of the continuous financing of
its growth by sales of bonds and shares. We do require an adequate
proportion of stock capital to debt.4
In Table 14-4 we present a résumé of the 15 issues in the Dow
Jones public-utility average. For comparison, Table 14-5 gives a
similar picture of a random selection of fifteen other utilities taken
from the New York Stock Exchange list.
As 1972 began the defensive investor could have had quite a
wide choice of utility common stocks, each of which would have
met our requirements for both performance and price. These com-
panies offered him everything he had a right to demand from 
simply chosen common-stock investments. In comparison with
prominent industrial companies as represented by the DJIA, they
offered almost as good a record of past growth, plus smaller fluctu-
ations in the annual figures—both at a lower price in relation to
earnings and assets. The dividend return was significantly higher.
The position of the utilities as regulated monopolies is assuredly
more of an advantage than a disadvantage for the conservative
investor. Under law they are entitled to charge rates sufficiently
remunerative to attract the capital they need for their continuous
expansion, and this implies adequate offsets to inflated costs.
While the process of regulation has often been cumbersome and
perhaps dilatory, it has not prevented the utilities from earning a
fair return on their rising invested capital over many decades.
356 The Intelligent Investor
celed and decommissioned nuclear energy plants; nor did he foresee the
consequences of bungled regulation in California. Utility stocks are vastly
more volatile than they were in Graham’s day, and most investors should
own them only through a well-diversified, low-cost fund like the Dow Jones
U.S. Utilities Sector Index Fund (ticker symbol: IDU) or Utilities Select Sec-
tor SPDR (XLU). For more information, see: www.ishares.com and www.
spdrindex.com/spdr/. (Be sure your broker will not charge commissions to
reinvest your dividends.)

===== PDF PAGE 371 =====
TABLE 14-4 Data on the Fifteen Stocks in the Dow Jones Utility Average at September 30, 1971
Earns.
Per Share 
Price Price/ 1970
Sept. 30, Book Price/ Book Div. vs. 
1971 Earned a Dividend Value Earnings Value Yield 1960
Am. Elec. Power 26 2.40 1.70 18.86 11 /H11003 138% 6.5% +87%
Cleveland El. Ill. 343⁄4 3.10 2.24 22.94 11 150 6.4 86
Columbia Gas System 33 2.95 1.76 25.58 11 129 5.3 85
Commonwealth Edison 35 1⁄2 3.05 2.20 27.28 12 130 6.2 56
Consolidated Edison 241⁄2 2.40 1.80 30.63 10 80 7.4 19
Consd. Nat. Gas 273⁄4 3.00 1.88 32.11 9 86 6.8 53
Detroit Edison 191⁄4 1.80 1.40 22.66 11 84 7.3 40
Houston Ltg. & Power 42 3⁄4 2.88 1.32 19.02 15 222 3.1 135
Niagara-Mohawk Pwr. 15 1⁄2 1.45 1.10 16.46 11 93 7.2 32
Pacific Gas & Electric 29 2.65 1.64 25.45 11 114 5.6 79
Panhandle E. Pipe L. 321⁄2 2.90 1.80 19.95 11 166 5.5 79
Peoples Gas Co. 311⁄2 2.70 2.08 30.28 8 104 6.6 23
Philadelphia El. 201⁄2 2.00 1.64 19.74 10 103 8.0 29
Public Svs. El. & Gas 251⁄2 2.80 1.64 21.81 9 116 6.4 80
Sou. Calif. Edison 291⁄4 2.80 1.50 27.28 10 107 5.1 85
Average 281⁄2 2.66 1.71 23.83 10.7/H11003 121% 6.2% +65%
a Estimated for year 1971.

===== PDF PAGE 372 =====
TABLE 14-5 Data on a Second List of Public-Utility Stocks at September 30, 1971
Earns.
Per Share 
Price Price/ 1970
Sept. 30, Book Price/ Book Div. vs. 
1971 Earned Dividend Value Earnings V alue Yield 1960
Alabama Gas 151⁄2 1.50 1.10 17.80 10 /H11003 87% 7.1% +34%
Allegheny Power 221⁄2 2.15 1.32 16.88 10 134 6.0 71
Am. Tel. & Tel. 43 4.05 2.60 45.47 11 95 6.0 47
Am. Water Works 14 1.46 .60 16.80 10 84 4.3 187
Atlantic City Elec. 201⁄2 1.85 1.36 14.81 11 138 6.6 74
Baltimore Gas & Elec. 301⁄4 2.85 1.82 23.03 11 132 6.0 86
Brooklyn Union Gas 231⁄2 2.00 1.12 20.91 12 112 7.3 29
Carolina Pwr. & Lt. 221⁄2 1.65 1.46 20.49 14 110 6.5 39
Cen. Hudson G. & E. 221⁄4 2.00 1.48 20.29 11 110 6.5 13
Cen. Ill. Lt. 251⁄4 2.50 1.56 22.16 10 114 6.5 55
Cen. Maine Pwr. 173⁄4 1.48 1.20 16.35 12 113 6.8 62
Cincinnati Gas & Elec. 23 1⁄4 2.20 1.56 16.13 11 145 6.7 102
Consumers Power 291⁄2 2.80 2.00 32.59 11 90 6.8 89
Dayton Pwr. & Lt. 23 2.25 1.66 16.79 10 137 7.2 94
Delmarva Pwr. & Lt. 161⁄2 1.55 1.12 14.04 11 117 6.7 78
Average 231⁄2 2.15 1.50 21.00 11 /H11003 112% 6.5% +71%

===== PDF PAGE 373 =====
For the defensive investor the central appeal of the public-utility
stocks at this time should be their availability at a moderate price
in relation to book value. This means that he can ignore stockmar-
ket considerations, if he wishes, and consider himself primarily as
a part owner of well-established and well-earning businesses. The
market quotations are always there for him to take advantage of
when times are propitious—either for purchases at unusually
attractive low levels, or for sales when their prices seem definitely
too high.
The market record of the public-utility indexes—condensed in
Table 14-6, along with those of other groups—indicates that there
have been ample possibilities of profit in these investments in the
past. While the rise has not been as great as in the industrial index,
the individual utilities have shown more price stability in most
periods than have other groups.* It is striking to observe in this
table that the relative price/earnings ratios of the industrials and
the utilities have changed places during the past two decades.
Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor 359
* In a remarkable confirmation of Graham’s point, the dull-sounding Stan-
dard & Poor’s Utility Index outperformed the vaunted NASDAQ Composite
Index for the 30 years ending December 31, 2002.
TABLE 14-6 Development of Prices and Price/Earnings Ratios
for Various Standard & Poor’s Averages,
1948–1970.
Industrials Railroads Utilities
Year Pricea P/E Ratio Price a P/E Ratio Price a P/E Ratio
1948 15.34 6.56 15.27 4.55 16.77 10.03
1953 24.84 9.56 22.60 5.42 24.03 14.00
1958 58.65 19.88 34.23 12.45 43.13 18.59
1963 79.25 18.18 40.65 12.78 66.42 20.44
1968 113.02 17.80 54.15 14.21 69.69 15.87
1970 100.00 17.84 34.40 12.83 61.75 13.16
a Prices are at the close of the year.

===== PDF PAGE 374 =====
These reversals will have more meaning for the active than for the
passive investor. But they suggest that even defensive portfolios
should be changed from time to time, especially if the securities
purchased have an apparently excessive advance and can be
replaced by issues much more reasonably priced. Alas! there will
be capital-gains taxes to pay—which for the typical investor seems
to be about the same as the Devil to pay. Our old ally, experience,
tells us here that it is better to sell and pay the tax than not sell and
repent.
Investing in Stocks of Financial Enterprises
A considerable variety of concerns may be ranged under the
rubric of “financial companies.” These would include banks, 
insurance companies, savings and loan associations, credit and
small-loan companies, mortgage companies, and “investment
companies” (e.g., mutual funds).* It is characteristic of all these
enterprises that they have a relatively small part of their assets in
the form of material things—such as fixed assets and merchandise
inventories—but on the other hand most categories have short-
term obligations well in excess of their stock capital. The question
of financial soundness is, therefore, more relevant here than in the
case of the typical manufacturing or commercial enterprise. This,
in turn, has given rise to various forms of regulation and supervi-
sion, with the design and general result of assuring against
unsound financial practices.
Broadly speaking, the shares of financial concerns have pro-
duced investment results similar to those of other types of common
shares. Table 14-7 shows price changes between 1948 and 1970 in
six groups represented in the Standard & Poor’s stock-price
indexes. The average for 1941–1943 is taken as 10, the base level.
360 The Intelligent Investor
* Today the financial-services industry is made up of even more components,
including commercial banks; savings & loan and mortgage-financing compa-
nies; consumer-finance firms like credit-card issuers; money managers and
trust companies; investment banks and brokerages; insurance companies;
and firms engaged in developing or owning real estate, including real-estate
investment trusts. Although the sector is much more diversified today,
Graham’s caveats about financial soundness apply more than ever.

===== PDF PAGE 375 =====
The year-end 1970 figures ranged between 44.3 for the 9 New York
banks and 218 for the 11 life-insurance stocks. During the sub-
intervals there was considerable variation in the respective price
movements. For example, the New York City bank stocks did quite
well between 1958 and 1968; conversely the spectacular life-
insurance group actually lost ground between 1963 and 1968.
These cross-movements are found in many, perhaps most, of the
numerous industry groups in the Standard & Poor’s indexes.
We have no very helpful remarks to offer in this broad area of
investment—other than to counsel that the same arithmetical stan-
dards for price in relation to earnings and book value be applied to
the choice of companies in these groups as we have suggested for
industrial and public-utility investments.
Railroad Issues
The railroad story is a far different one from that of the utilities.
The carriers have suffered severely from a combination of severe
competition and strict regulation. (Their labor-cost problem has of
Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor 361
TABLE 14-7 Relative Price Movements of Stocks of Various
Types of Financial Companies Between 1948 
and 1970
1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1970
Life insurance 17.1 59.5 156.6 318.1 282.2 218.0
Property and liability 
insurance 13.7 23.9 41.0 64.7 99.2 84.3
New York City banks 11.2 15.0 24.3 36.8 49.6 44.3
Banks outside 
New York City 16.9 33.3 48.7 75.9 96.9 83.3
Finance companies 15.6 27.1 55.4 64.3 92.8 78.3
Small-loan companies 18.4 36.4 68.5 118.2 142.8 126.8
Standard & Poor’s 
composite 13.2 24.8 55.2 75.0 103.9 92.2
a Year-end figures from Standard & Poor’s stock-price indexes. Average of 1941–
1943 = 10.

===== PDF PAGE 376 =====
course been difficult as well, but that has not been confined to rail-
roads.) Automobiles, buses, and airlines have drawn off most of
their passenger business and left the rest highly unprofitable; the
trucks have taken a good deal of their freight traffic. More than half
of the railroad mileage of the country has been in bankruptcy (or
“trusteeship”) at various times during the past 50 years.
But this half-century has not been all downhill for the carriers.
There have been prosperous periods for the industry, especially the
war years. Some of the lines have managed to maintain their earn-
ing power and their dividends despite the general difficulties.
The Standard & Poor’s index advanced sevenfold from the low
of 1942 to the high of 1968, not much below the percentage gain in
the public-utility index. The bankruptcy of the Penn Central Trans-
portation Co., our most important railroad, in 1970 shocked the
financial world. Only a year and two years previously the stock
sold at close to the highest price level in its long history, and it had
paid continuous dividends for more than 120 years! (On p. 423
below we present a brief analysis of this railroad to illustrate how a
competent student could have detected the developing weaknesses
in the company’s picture and counseled against ownership of its
securities.) The market level of railroad shares as a whole was seri-
ously affected by this financial disaster.
It is usually unsound to make blanket recommendations of
whole classes of securities, and there are equal objections to broad
condemnations. The record of railroad share prices in Table 14-6
shows that the group as a whole has often offered chances for a
large profit. (But in our view the great advances were in them-
selves largely unwarranted.) Let us confine our suggestion to this:
There is no compelling reason for the investor to own railroad
shares; before he buys any he should make sure that he is getting
so much value for his money that it would be unreasonable to look
for something else instead.*
362 The Intelligent Investor
* Only a few major rail stocks now remain, including Burlington Northern,
CSX, Norfolk Southern, and Union Pacific. The advice in this section is at
least as relevant to airline stocks today—with their massive current losses
and a half-century of almost incessantly poor results—as it was to railroads
in Graham’s day.

===== PDF PAGE 377 =====
Selectivity for the Defensive Investor
Every investor would like his list to be better or more promising
than the average. Hence the reader will ask whether, if he gets him-
self a competent adviser or security analyst, he should not be able to
count on being supplied with an investment package of really supe-
rior merits. “After all,” he may say, “the rules you have outlined are
pretty simple and easygoing. A highly trained analyst ought to be
able to use all his skill and techniques to improve substantially on
something as obvious as the Dow Jones list. If not, what good are all
his statistics, calculations, and pontifical judgments?”
Suppose, as a practical test, we had asked a hundred security
analysts to choose the “best” five stocks in the Dow Jones Average,
to be bought at the end of 1970. Few would have come up with
identical choices and many of the lists would have differed com-
pletely from each other.
This is not so surprising as it may at first appear. The underlying
reason is that the current price of each prominent stock pretty well
reflects the salient factors in its financial record plus the general
opinion as to its future prospects. Hence the view of any analyst that
one stock is a better buy than the rest must arise to a great extent
from his personal partialities and expectations, or from the placing
of his emphasis on one set of factors rather than on another in his
work of evaluation. If all analysts were agreed that one particular
stock was better than all the rest, that issue would quickly advance
to a price which would offset all of its previous advantages.*
Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor 363
* Graham is summarizing the “efficient markets hypothesis, ” or EMH, an aca-
demic theory claiming that the price of each stock incorporates all publicly
available information about the company. With millions of investors scouring
the market every day, it is unlikely that severe mispricings can persist for
long. An old joke has two finance professors walking along the sidewalk;
when one spots a $20 bill and bends over to pick it up, the other grabs his
arm and says, “Don’t bother. If it was really a $20 bill, someone would have
taken it already. ” While the market is not perfectly efficient, it is pretty close
most of the time—so the intelligent investor will stoop to pick up the stock
market’s $20 bills only after researching them thoroughly and minimizing the
costs of trading and taxes.

===== PDF PAGE 378 =====
Our statement that the current price reflects both known facts
and future expectations was intended to emphasize the double
basis for market valuations. Corresponding with these two kinds
of value elements are two basically different approaches to security
analysis. To be sure, every competent analyst looks forward to the
future rather than backward to the past, and he realizes that his
work will prove good or bad depending on what will happen and
not on what has happened. Nevertheless, the future itself can be
approached in two different ways, which may be called the way of
prediction (or projection) and the way of protection.*
Those who emphasize prediction will endeavor to anticipate
fairly accurately just what the company will accomplish in future
years—in particular whether earnings will show pronounced and
persistent growth. These conclusions may be based on a very care-
ful study of such factors as supply and demand in the industry—or
volume, price, and costs—or else they may be derived from a
rather naïve projection of the line of past growth into the future. If
these authorities are convinced that the fairly long-term prospects
are unusually favorable, they will almost always recommend the
stock for purchase without paying too much regard to the level at
which it is selling. Such, for example, was the general attitude with
respect to the air-transport stocks—an attitude that persisted for
many years despite the distressingly bad results often shown after
1946. In the Introduction we have commented on the disparity
between the strong price action and the relatively disappointing
earnings record of this industry.
364 The Intelligent Investor
* This is one of the central points of Graham’s book. All investors labor
under a cruel irony: We invest in the present, but we invest for the future.
And, unfortunately, the future is almost entirely uncertain. Inflation and inter-
est rates are undependable; economic recessions come and go at random;
geopolitical upheavals like war, commodity shortages, and terrorism arrive
without warning; and the fate of individual companies and their industries
often turns out to be the opposite of what most investors expect. Therefore,
investing on the basis of projection is a fool’s errand; even the forecasts of
the so-called experts are less reliable than the flip of a coin. For most peo-
ple, investing on the basis of protection—from overpaying for a stock and
from overconfidence in the quality of their own judgment—is the best solu-
tion. Graham expands on this concept in Chapter 20.

===== PDF PAGE 379 =====
By contrast, those who emphasize protection are always espe-
cially concerned with the price of the issue at the time of study.
Their main effort is to assure themselves of a substantial margin of
indicated present value above the market price—which margin
could absorb unfavorable developments in the future. Generally
speaking, therefore, it is not so necessary for them to be enthusias-
tic over the company’s long-run prospects as it is to be reasonably
confident that the enterprise will get along.
The first, or predictive, approach could also be called the quali-
tative approach, since it emphasizes prospects, management, and
other nonmeasurable, albeit highly important, factors that go
under the heading of quality. The second, or protective, approach
may be called the quantitative or statistical approach, since it
emphasizes the measurable relationships between selling price and
earnings, assets, dividends, and so forth. Incidentally, the quantita-
tive method is really an extension—into the field of common
stocks—of the viewpoint that security analysis has found to be
sound in the selection of bonds and preferred stocks for invest-
ment.
In our own attitude and professional work we were always
committed to the quantitative approach. From the first we wanted
to make sure that we were getting ample value for our money in
concrete, demonstrable terms. We were not willing to accept the
prospects and promises of the future as compensation for a lack of
sufficient value in hand. This has by no means been the standard
viewpoint among investment authorities; in fact, the majority
would probably subscribe to the view that prospects, quality of
management, other intangibles, and “the human factor” far out-
weigh the indications supplied by any study of the past record, the
balance sheet, and all the other cold figures.
Thus this matter of choosing the “best” stocks is at bottom a
highly controversial one. Our advice to the defensive investor is
that he let it alone. Let him emphasize diversification more than
individual selection. Incidentally, the universally accepted idea of
diversification is, in part at least, the negation of the ambitious pre-
tensions of selectivity. If one could select the best stocks unerringly,
one would only lose by diversifying. Yet within the limits of the
four most general rules of common-stock selection suggested for
the defensive investor (on pp. 114–115) there is room for a rather
considerable freedom of preference. At the worst the indulgence of
Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor 365

===== PDF PAGE 380 =====
such preferences should do no harm; beyond that, it may add
something worthwhile to the results. With the increasing impact of
technological developments on long-term corporate results, the
investor cannot leave them out of his calculations. Here, as else-
where, he must seek a mean between neglect and overemphasis.
366 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 381 =====
COMMENTARY ON C HAPTER 14
He that resteth upon gains certain, shall hardly grow to great
riches; and he that puts all upon adventures, doth oftentimes
break and come to poverty: it is good therefore to guard adven-
tures with certainties that may uphold losses.
—Sir Francis Bacon
GETTING STARTED
How should you tackle the nitty-gritty work of stock selection? Gra-
ham suggests that the defensive investor can, “most simply, ” buy every
stock in the DowJones Industrial Average. Today’s defensive investor
can do even better—by buying a total stock-market index fund that
holds essentially every stock worth having. A low-cost index fund is
the best tool ever created for low-maintenance stock investing—and
any effort to improve on it takes more work (and incurs more risk and
higher costs) than a truly defensive investor can justify.
Researching and selecting your own stocks is not necessary; for
most people, it is not even advisable. However, some defensive
investors do enjoy the diversion and intellectual challenge of picking
individual stocks—and, if you have survived a bear market and still
enjoy stock picking, then nothing that Graham or I could say will dis-
suade you. In that case, instead of making a total stock market index
fund your complete portfolio, make it the foundation of your portfolio.
Once you have that foundation in place, you can experiment around
the edges with your own stock choices. Keep 90% of your stock
money in an index fund, leaving 10% with which to try picking your
own stocks. Only after you build that solid core should you explore.
(To learn why such broad diversification is so important, please see
the sidebar on the following page.)
367

===== PDF PAGE 382 =====
368 Commentary on Chapter 14
WHY DIVERSIFY?
During the bull market of the 1990s, one of the most common
criticisms of diversification was that it lowers your potential for
high returns. After all, if you could identify the next Microsoft,
wouldn’t it make sense for you to put all your eggs into that one
basket?
Well, sure. As the humorist Will Rogers once said, “Don’t
gamble. Take all your savings and buy some good stock and
hold it till it goes up, then sell it. If it don’t go up, don’t buy it. ”
However, as Rogers knew, 20/20 foresight is not a gift
granted to most investors. No matter how confident we feel,
there’s no way to find out whether a stock will go up until after
we buy it. Therefore, the stock you think is “the next Micro-
soft” may well turn out to be the next MicroStrategy instead.
(That former market star went from $3,130 per share in March
2000 to $15.10 at year-end 2002, an apocalyptic loss of
99.5%).1 Keeping your money spread across many stocks and
industries is the only reliable insurance against the risk of being
wrong.
But diversification doesn’t just minimize your odds of being
wrong. It also maximizes your chances of being right. Over long
periods of time, a handful of stocks turn into “superstocks” that
go up 10,000% or more. Money Magazine identified the 30
best-performing stocks over the 30 years ending in 2002—and,
even with 20/20 hindsight, the list is startlingly unpredictable.
Rather than lots of technology or health-care stocks, it includes
Southwest Airlines, Worthington Steel, Dollar General discount
stores, and snuff-tobacco maker UST Inc. 2 If you think you
would have been willing to bet big on any of those stocks back
in 1972, you are kidding yourself.
Think of it this way: In the huge market haystack, only a few
needles ever go on to generate truly gigantic gains. The more of
the haystack you own, the higher the odds go that you will end
up finding at least one of those needles. By owning the entire
haystack (ideally through an index fund that tracks the total U.S.
stock market) you can be sure to find every needle, thus captur-
ing the returns of all the superstocks. Especially if you are a

===== PDF PAGE 383 =====
TESTING, TESTING
Let’s briefly update Graham’s criteria for stock selection.
Adequate size. Nowadays, “to exclude small companies, ” most
defensive investors should steer clear of stocks with a total market value
of less than $2 billion. In early 2003, that still left you with 437 of the
companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index to choose from.
However, today’s defensive investors—unlike those in Graham’s day—
can conveniently own small companies by buying a mutual fund special-
izing in small stocks. Again, an index fund like Vanguard Small-Cap Index
is the first choice, although active funds are available at reasonable cost
from such firms as Ariel, T. Rowe Price, Royce, and Third Avenue.
Strong financial condition. According to market strategists Steve
Galbraith and Jay Lasus of Morgan Stanley, at the beginning of 2003
about 120 of the companies in the S & P 500 index met Graham’s
test of a 2-to-1 current ratio. With current assets at least twice their
current liabilities, these firms had a sizeable cushion of working capital
that—on average—should sustain them through hard times.
Wall Street has always abounded in bitter ironies, and the bursting
of the growth-stock bubble has created a doozy: In 1999 and 2000,
high-tech, bio-tech, and telecommunications stocks were supposed to
provide “aggressive growth” and ended up giving most of their
investors aggressive shrinkage instead. But, by early 2003, the wheel
had come full circle, and many of those aggressive growth stocks had
become financially conservative—loaded with working capital, rich in
cash, and often debt-free. This table provides a sampler:
Commentary on Chapter 14 369
defensive investor, why look for the needles when you can own
the whole haystack?
1 Adjusted for stock splits. To many people, MicroStrategy really did look like
the next Microsoft in early 2000; its stock had gained 566.7% in 1999, and its
chairman, Michael Saylor, declared that “our future today is better than it was
18 months ago. ” The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission later accused
MicroStrategy of accounting fraud, and Saylor paid an $8.3 million fine to set-
tle the charges.
2 Jon Birger, “The 30 Best Stocks, ” Money, Fall 2002, pp. 88–95.

===== PDF PAGE 384 =====
370 Commentary on Chapter 14
FIGURE 14-1 Everything New Is Old Again
Ratio of Ratio of
Current Long-Term
Assets to Debt to
Current Current Current Long-Term Working
Company Assets Liabilities Liabilities Debt Capital
Applied Micro 
Circuits 1091.2 61.9 17.6 0 none
Linear
Technology 1736.4 148.1 11.7 0 none
QLogic Corp. 713.1 69.6 10.2 0 none
Analog Devices 3711.1 467.3 7.9 1274.5 0.39
Qualcomm Inc. 4368.5 654.9 6.7 156.9 0.04
Maxim Integrated 
Products 1390.5 212.3 6.5 0 none
Applied Materials 7878.7 1298.4 6.1 573.9 0.09
Tellabs Inc. 1533.6 257.3 6.0 0.5 0.0004
Scientific-Atlanta 1259.8 252.4 5.0 8.8 0.01
Altera Corp. 1176.2 240.5 4.9 0 none
Xilinx Inc. 1108.8 228.1 4.9 0 none
American Power 
Conversion 1276.3 277.4 4.6 0 none
Chiron Corp. 1393.8 306.7 4.5 414.9 0.38
Biogen Inc. 1194.7 265.4 4.5 39 0.04
Novellus Systems 1633.9 381.6 4.3 0 none
Amgen Inc. 6403.5 1529.2 4.2 3039.7 0.62
LSI Logic Corp. 1626.1 397.8 4.1 1287.1 1.05
Rowan Cos. 469.9 116.0 4.1 494.8 1.40
Biomet Inc. 1000.0 248.6 4.0 0 none
Siebel Systems 2588.4 646.5 4.0 315.6 0.16
All figures in millions of dollars from latest available financial statements as of
12/31/02. Working capital is current assets minus current liabilities.
Long-term debt includes preferred stock, excludes deferred tax liabilities.
Sources: Morgan Stanley; Baseline; EDGAR database at www.sec.gov.
In 1999, most of these companies were among the hottest of the market’s dar-
lings, offering the promise of high potential growth. By early 2003, they offered
hard evidence of true value.

===== PDF PAGE 385 =====
The lesson here is not that these stocks were “a sure thing, ” or that
you should rush out and buy everything (or anything) in this table. 1
Instead, you should realize that a defensive investor can always pros-
per by looking patiently and calmly through the wreckage of a bear
market. Graham’s criterion of financial strength still works: If you build
a diversified basket of stocks whose current assets are at least double
their current liabilities, and whose long-term debt does not exceed
working capital, you should end up with a group of conservatively
financed companies with plenty of staying power. The best values
today are often found in the stocks that were once hot and have since
gone cold. Throughout history, such stocks have often provided the
margin of safety that a defensive investor demands.
Earnings stability. According to Morgan Stanley, 86% of all the
companies in the S & P 500 index have had positive earnings in every
year from 1993 through 2002. So Graham’s insistence on “some
earnings for the common stock in each of the past ten years” remains
a valid test—tough enough to eliminate chronic losers, but not so
restrictive as to limit your choices to an unrealistically small sample.
Dividend record. As of early 2003, according to Standard &
Poor’s, 354 companies in the S & P 500 (or 71% of the total) paid a
dividend. No fewer than 255 companies have paid a dividend for at
least 20 years in a row. And, according to S & P, 57 companies in the
index have raised their dividends for at least 25 consecutive years.
That’s no guarantee that they will do so forever, but it’s a comfort-
ing sign.
Earnings growth. How many companies in the S & P 500
increased their earnings per share by “at least one third, ” as Graham
requires, over the 10 years ending in 2002? (We’ll average each
company’s earnings from 1991 through 1993, and then determine
whether the average earnings from 2000 through 2002 were at least
33% higher.) According to Morgan Stanley, 264 companies in the 
S & P 500 met that test. But here, it seems, Graham set a very low
hurdle; 33% cumulative growth over a decade is less than a 3% aver-
age annual increase. Cumulative growth in earnings per share of at
least 50%—or a 4% average annual rise—is a bit less conservative. No
Commentary on Chapter 14 371
1 By the time you read this, much will already have changed since year-end
2002.

===== PDF PAGE 386 =====
372 Commentary on Chapter 14
FIGURE 14-2 Steady Eddies
These companies have paid higher dividends with each passing year with no exception.
Company Sector
Cash
dividends
paid each
year since . . .
Number of 
annual
dividend
increases in 
the past 
40 years
3M Co Industrials 1916 40
Abbott Laboratories Health Care 1926 35
ALLTEL Corp Telecomm. Services 1961 37
Altria Group 
(formerly Philip Morris) Consumer Staples 1928 36
AmSouth Bancorp Financials 1943 34
Anheuser-Busch Cos Consumer Staples 1932 39
Archer-Daniels-Midland Consumer Staples 1927 32
Automatic Data Proc Industrials 1974 29
Avery Dennison Corp Industrials 1964 36
Bank of America Financials 1903 36
Bard (C. R.) Health Care 1960 36
Becton, Dickinson Health Care 1926 38
CenturyTel Inc Telecomm. Services 1974 29
Chubb Corp Financials 1902 28
Clorox Co Consumer Staples 1968 30
Coca-Cola Co Consumer Staples 1893 40
Comerica Inc Financials 1936 39
ConAgra Foods Consumer Staples 1976 32
Consolidated Edison Utilities 1885 31
Donnelley(R. R.) & Sons Industrials 1911 36
Dover Corp Industrials 1947 37
Emerson Electric Industrials 1947 40
Family Dollar Stores Consumer Discretionary 1976 27
First Tenn Natl Financials 1895 31
Gannett Co Consumer Discretionary 1929 35
General Electric Industrials 1899 35
Grainger (W. W.) Industrials 1965 33
Heinz (H. J.) Consumer Staples 1911 38

===== PDF PAGE 387 =====
Commentary on Chapter 14 373
Household Intl. Financials 1926 40
Jefferson-Pilot Financials 1913 36
Johnson & Johnson Health Care 1944 40
Johnson Controls Consumer Discretionary 1887 29
KeyCorp Financials 1963 36
Kimberly-Clark Consumer Staples 1935 34
Leggett & Platt Consumer Discretionary 1939 33
Lilly (Eli) Health Care 1885 38
Lowe’s Cos. Consumer Discretionary 1961 40
May Dept Stores Consumer Discretionary 1911 31
McDonald’s Corp. Consumer Discretionary 1976 27
McGraw-Hill Cos. Consumer Discretionary 1937 35
Merck & Co Health Care 1935 38
Nucor Corp. Materials 1973 30
PepsiCo Inc. Consumer Staples 1952 35
Pfizer, Inc. Health Care 1901 39
PPG Indus. Materials 1899 37
Procter & Gamble Consumer Staples 1891 40
Regions Financial Financials 1968 32
Rohm & Haas Materials 1927 38
Sigma-Aldrich Materials 1970 28
Stanley Works Consumer Discretionary 1877 37
Supervalu Inc. Consumer Staples 1936 36
Target Corp. Consumer Discretionary 1965 34
TECO Energy Utilities 1900 40
U.S. Bancorp Financials 1999 35
VF Corp. Consumer Discretionary 1941 35
Wal-Mart Stores Consumer Discretionary 1973 29
Walgreen Co. Consumer Staples 1933 31
Source: Standard & Poor’s Corp.
Data as of 12/31/2002.

===== PDF PAGE 388 =====
fewer than 245 companies in the S & P 500 index met that criterion as
of early 2003, leaving the defensive investor an ample list to choose
from. (If you double the cumulative growth hurdle to 100%, or 7%
average annual growth, then 198 companies make the cutoff.)
Moderate P/E ratio. Graham recommends limiting yourself to
stocks whose current price is no more than 15 times average earnings
over the past three years. Incredibly, the prevailing practice on Wall
Street today is to value stocks by dividing their current price by some-
thing called “next year’s earnings. ” That gives what is sometimes
called “the forward P/E ratio. ” But it’s nonsensical to derive a
price/earnings ratio by dividing the known current price by unknown
future earnings. Over the long run, money manager David Dreman has
shown, 59% of Wall Street’s “consensus” earnings forecasts miss the
mark by a mortifyingly wide margin—either underestimating or overesti-
mating the actual reported earnings by at least 15%. 2 Investing your
money on the basis of what these myopic soothsayers predict for the
coming year is as risky as volunteering to hold up the bulls-eye at an
archery tournament for the legally blind. Instead, calculate a stock’s
price/earnings ratio yourself, using Graham’s formula of current price
divided by average earnings over the past three years.3
As of early 2003, how many stocks in the Standard & Poor’s 500
index were valued at no more than 15 times their average earnings of
2000 through 2002? According to Morgan Stanley, a generous total
of 185 companies passed Graham’s test.
Moderate price-to-book ratio. Graham recommends a “ratio of
price to assets” (or price-to-book-value ratio) of no more than 1.5. In
recent years, an increasing proportion of the value of companies has
come from intangible assets like franchises, brand names, and patents
and trademarks. Since these factors (along with goodwill from acqui-
sitions) are excluded from the standard definition of book value, most
companies today are priced at higher price-to-book multiples than in
Graham’s day. According to Morgan Stanley, 123 of the companies in
the S & P 500 (or one in four) are priced below 1.5 times book value.
374 Commentary on Chapter 14
2 David Dreman, “Bubbles and the Role of Analysts’ Forecasts, ” The Journal
of Psychology and Financial Markets, vol. 3, no. 1 (2002), pp. 4–14.
3 You can calculate this ratio by hand from a company’s annual reports or
obtain the data at websites like www.morningstar.com or http://finance.
yahoo.com.

===== PDF PAGE 389 =====
All told, 273 companies (or 55% of the index) have price-to-book
ratios of less than 2.5.
What about Graham’s suggestion that you multiply the P/E ratio by
the price-to-book ratio and see whether the resulting number is below
22.5? Based on data from Morgan Stanley, at least 142 stocks in the
S & P 500 could pass that test as of early 2003, including Dana
Corp., Electronic Data Systems, Sun Microsystems, and Washington
Mutual. So Graham’s “blended multiplier” still works as an initial
screen to identify reasonably-priced stocks.
DUE DILIGENCE
No matter how defensive an investor you are—in Graham’s sense of
wishing to minimize the work you put into picking stocks—there are a
couple of steps you cannot afford to skip:
Do your homework. Through the EDGAR database at www.sec.
gov, you get instant access to a company’s annual and quarterly
reports, along with the proxy statement that discloses the managers’
compensation, ownership, and potential conflicts of interest. Read at
least five years’ worth.4
Check out the neighborhood. Websites like http://quicktake.
morningstar.com, http://finance.yahoo.com and www.quicken.com can
readily tell you what percentage of a company’s shares are owned by
institutions. Anything over 60% suggests that a stock is scarcely
undiscovered and probably “overowned. ” (When big institutions sell,
they tend to move in lockstep, with disastrous results for the stock.
Imagine all the Radio City Rockettes toppling off the front edge of the
stage at once and you get the idea.) Those websites will also tell you
who the largest owners of the stock are. If they are money-
management firms that invest in a style similar to your own, that’s a
good sign.
Commentary on Chapter 14 375
4 For more on what to look for, see the commentary on Chapters 11, 12, and
19. If you are not willing to go to the minimal effort of reading the proxy and
making basic comparisons of financial health across five years’ worth of
annual reports, then you are too defensive to be buying individual stocks at
all. Get yourself out of the stock-picking business and into an index fund,
where you belong.
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 20 | PDF PAGES 526-640 =====

===== PDF PAGE 526 =====
CHAPTER 20
“Margin of Safety” as the 
Central Concept of Investment
In the old legend the wise men finally boiled down the history of
mortal affairs into the single phrase, “This too will pass.”* Con-
fronted with a like challenge to distill the secret of sound invest-
ment into three words, we venture the motto, MARGIN OF
SAFETY. This is the thread that runs through all the preceding dis-
cussion of investment policy—often explicitly, sometimes in a less
direct fashion. Let us try now, briefly, to trace that idea in a con-
nected argument.
All experienced investors recognize that the margin-of-safety
concept is essential to the choice of sound bonds and preferred
stocks. For example, a railroad should have earned its total fixed
charges better than five times (before income tax), taking a period
of years, for its bonds to qualify as investment-grade issues. This
past ability to earn in excess of interest requirements constitutes the
margin of safety that is counted on to protect the investor against
loss or discomfiture in the event of some future decline in net
income. (The margin above charges may be stated in other ways—
512
* “It is said an Eastern monarch once charged his wise men to invent him a
sentence, to be ever in view, and which should be true and appropriate in all
times and situations. They presented him the words: ‘ And this, too, shall
pass away.’ How much it expresses! How chastening in the hour of pride!—
how consoling in the depths of affliction! ‘And this, too, shall pass away. ’ And
yet let us hope it is not quite true. ”—Abraham Lincoln, Address to the Wis-
consin State Agricultural Society, Milwaukee, September 30, 1859, in Abra-
ham Lincoln: Speeches and Writings, 1859–1865 (Library of America,
1985), vol. II, p. 101.

===== PDF PAGE 527 =====
for example, in the percentage by which revenues or profits may
decline before the balance after interest disappears—but the under-
lying idea remains the same.)
The bond investor does not expect future average earnings to
work out the same as in the past; if he were sure of that, the margin
demanded might be small. Nor does he rely to any controlling
extent on his judgment as to whether future earnings will be mate-
rially better or poorer than in the past, if he did that, he would have
to measure his margin in terms of a carefully projected income
account, instead of emphasizing the margin shown in the past
record. Here the function of the margin of safety is, in essence, that
of rendering unnecessary an accurate estimate of the future. If the
margin is a large one, then it is enough to assume that future earn-
ings will not fall far below those of the past in order for an investor
to feel sufficiently protected against the vicissitudes of time.
The margin of safety for bonds may be calculated, alternatively,
by comparing the total value of the enterprise with the amount of
debt. (A similar calculation may be made for a preferred-stock
issue.) If the business owes $10 million and is fairly worth $30 mil-
lion, there is room for a shrinkage of two-thirds in value—at least
theoretically—before the bondholders will suffer loss. The amount
of this extra value, or “cushion,” above the debt may be approxi-
mated by using the average market price of the junior stock issues
over a period of years. Since average stock prices are generally
related to average earning power, the margin of “enterprise value”
over debt and the margin of earnings over charges will in most
cases yield similar results.
So much for the margin-of-safety concept as applied to “fixed-
value investments.” Can it be carried over into the field of common
stocks? Yes, but with some necessary modifications.
There are instances where a common stock may be considered
sound because it enjoys a margin of safety as large as that of a good
bond. This will occur, for example, when a company has outstand-
ing only common stock that under depression conditions is selling
for less than the amount of bonds that could safely be issued
against its property and earning power.* That was the position of a
“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment 513
* “Earning power” is Graham’s term for a company’s potential profits or, as
he puts it, the amount that a firm “might be expected to earn year after year

===== PDF PAGE 528 =====
host of strongly financed industrial companies at the low price lev-
els of 1932–33. In such instances the investor can obtain the margin
of safety associated with a bond, plus all the chances of larger
income and principal appreciation inherent in a common stock.
(The only thing he lacks is the legal power to insist on dividend
payments “or else”—but this is a small drawback as compared
with his advantages.) Common stocks bought under such circum-
stances will supply an ideal, though infrequent, combination of
safety and profit opportunity. As a quite recent example of this con-
dition, let us mention once more National Presto Industries stock,
which sold for a total enterprise value of $43 million in 1972. With
its $16 millions of recent earnings before taxes the company could
easily have supported this amount of bonds.
In the ordinary common stock, bought for investment under
normal conditions, the margin of safety lies in an expected earning
power considerably above the going rate for bonds. In former edi-
tions we elucidated this point with the following figures:
Assume in a typical case that the earning power is 9% on the
price and that the bond rate is 4%; then the stockbuyer will have
an average annual margin of 5% accruing in his favor. Some of the
excess is paid to him in the dividend rate; even though spent by
him, it enters into his overall investment result. The undistributed
balance is reinvested in the business for his account. In many cases
such reinvested earnings fail to add commensurately to the earn-
ing power and value of his stock. (That is why the market has a
stubborn habit of valuing earnings disbursed in dividends more
generously than the portion retained in the business.)* But, if the
picture is viewed as a whole, there is a reasonably close connection
514 The Intelligent Investor
if the business conditions prevailing during the period were to continue
unchanged” (Security Analysis, 1934 ed., p. 354). Some of his lectures
make it clear that Graham intended the term to cover periods of five years or
more. You can crudely but conveniently approximate a company’s earning
power per share by taking the inverse of its price/earnings ratio; a stock with
a P/E ratio of 11 can be said to have earning power of 9% (or 1 divided by
11). Today “earning power” is often called “earnings yield. ”
* This problem is discussed extensively in the commentary on Chapter 19.

===== PDF PAGE 529 =====
between the growth of corporate surpluses through reinvested
earnings and the growth of corporate values.
Over a ten-year period the typical excess of stock earning
power over bond interest may aggregate 50% of the price paid.
This figure is sufficient to provide a very real margin of safety—
which, under favorable conditions, will prevent or minimize a
loss. If such a margin is present in each of a diversified list of
twenty or more stocks, the probability of a favorable result under
“fairly normal conditions” becomes very large. That is why the
policy of investing in representative common stocks does not
require high qualities of insight and foresight to work out success-
fully. If the purchases are made at the average level of the market
over a span of years, the prices paid should carry with them assur-
ance of an adequate margin of safety. The danger to investors lies
in concentrating their purchases in the upper levels of the market,
or in buying nonrepresentative common stocks that carry more
than average risk of diminished earning power.
As we see it, the whole problem of common-stock investment
under 1972 conditions lies in the fact that “in a typical case” the
earning power is now much less than 9% on the price paid.* Let us
assume that by concentrating somewhat on the low-multiplier
issues among the large companies a defensive investor may now
“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment 515
* Graham elegantly summarized the discussion that follows in a lecture he
gave in 1972: “The margin of safety is the difference between the percent-
age rate of the earnings on the stock at the price you pay for it and the rate
of interest on bonds, and that margin of safety is the difference which would
absorb unsatisfactory developments. At the time the 1965 edition of The
Intelligent Investor was written the typical stock was selling at 11 times
earnings, giving about 9% return as against 4% on bonds. In that case you
had a margin of safety of over 100 per cent. Now [in 1972] there is no dif-
ference between the earnings rate on stocks and the interest rate on stocks,
and I say there is no margin of safety . . . you have a negative margin of
safety on stocks . . . ” See “Benjamin Graham: Thoughts on Security Analy-
sis” [transcript of lecture at the Northeast Missouri State University busi-
ness school, March, 1972], Financial History, no. 42, March, 1991, p. 9.

===== PDF PAGE 530 =====
acquire equities at 12 times recent earnings—i.e., with an earnings
return of 8.33% on cost. He may obtain a dividend yield of about
4%, and he will have 4.33% of his cost reinvested in the business for
his account. On this basis, the excess of stock earning power over
bond interest over a ten-year basis would still be too small to con-
stitute an adequate margin of safety. For that reason we feel that
there are real risks now even in a diversified list of sound common
stocks. The risks may be fully offset by the profit possibilities of 
the list; and indeed the investor may have no choice but to incur
them—for otherwise he may run an even greater risk of holding
only fixed claims payable in steadily depreciating dollars. None-
theless the investor would do well to recognize, and to accept 
as philosophically as he can, that the old package of good profit 
possibilities combined with small ultimate risk is no longer available 
to him.*
However, the risk of paying too high a price for good-quality
stocks—while a real one—is not the chief hazard confronting the
average buyer of securities. Observation over many years has
taught us that the chief losses to investors come from the purchase
of low-quality securities at times of favorable business conditions.
The purchasers view the current good earnings as equivalent to
“earning power” and assume that prosperity is synonymous with
safety. It is in those years that bonds and preferred stocks of infe-
rior grade can be sold to the public at a price around par, because
they carry a little higher income return or a deceptively attractive
conversion privilege. It is then, also, that common stocks of
obscure companies can be floated at prices far above the tangible
investment, on the strength of two or three years of excellent
growth.
These securities do not offer an adequate margin of safety in any
admissible sense of the term. Coverage of interest charges and pre-
ferred dividends must be tested over a number of years, including
preferably a period of subnormal business such as in 1970–71. The
same is ordinarily true of common-stock earnings if they are to
516 The Intelligent Investor
* This paragraph—which Graham wrote in early 1972—is an uncannily pre-
cise description of market conditions in early 2003. (For more detail, see the
commentary on Chapter 3.)

===== PDF PAGE 531 =====
qualify as indicators of earning power. Thus it follows that most of
the fair-weather investments, acquired at fair-weather prices, are
destined to suffer disturbing price declines when the horizon
clouds over—and often sooner than that. Nor can the investor
count with confidence on an eventual recovery—although this
does come about in some proportion of the cases—for he has never
had a real safety margin to tide him through adversity.
The philosophy of investment in growth stocks parallels in part
and in part contravenes the margin-of-safety principle. The
growth-stock buyer relies on an expected earning power that is
greater than the average shown in the past. Thus he may be said to
substitute these expected earnings for the past record in calculating
his margin of safety. In investment theory there is no reason why
carefully estimated future earnings should be a less reliable guide
than the bare record of the past; in fact, security analysis is coming
more and more to prefer a competently executed evaluation of the
future. Thus the growth-stock approach may supply as dependable
a margin of safety as is found in the ordinary investment—
provided the calculation of the future is conservatively made, and
provided it shows a satisfactory margin in relation to the price
paid.
The danger in a growth-stock program lies precisely here. For
such favored issues the market has a tendency to set prices that
will not be adequately protected by a conservative projection of
future earnings. (It is a basic rule of prudent investment that all
estimates, when they differ from past performance, must err at
least slightly on the side of understatement.) The margin of safety
is always dependent on the price paid. It will be large at one price,
small at some higher price, nonexistent at some still higher price. If,
as we suggest, the average market level of most growth stocks is
too high to provide an adequate margin of safety for the buyer,
then a simple technique of diversified buying in this field may not
work out satisfactorily. A special degree of foresight and judgment
will be needed, in order that wise individual selections may over-
come the hazards inherent in the customary market level of such
issues as a whole.
The margin-of-safety idea becomes much more evident when
we apply it to the field of undervalued or bargain securities. We
have here, by definition, a favorable difference between price on
“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment 517

===== PDF PAGE 532 =====
the one hand and indicated or appraised value on the other. That
difference is the safety margin. It is available for absorbing the
effect of miscalculations or worse than average luck. The buyer of
bargain issues places particular emphasis on the ability of the
investment to withstand adverse developments. For in most such
cases he has no real enthusiasm about the company’s prospects.
True, if the prospects are definitely bad the investor will prefer to
avoid the security no matter how low the price. But the field of
undervalued issues is drawn from the many concerns—perhaps a
majority of the total—for which the future appears neither dis-
tinctly promising nor distinctly unpromising. If these are bought
on a bargain basis, even a moderate decline in the earning power
need not prevent the investment from showing satisfactory results.
The margin of safety will then have served its proper purpose.
Theory of Diversification
There is a close logical connection between the concept of a
safety margin and the principle of diversification. One is correla-
tive with the other. Even with a margin in the investor’s favor, an
individual security may work out badly. For the margin guarantees
only that he has a better chance for profit than for loss—not that
loss is impossible. But as the number of such commitments is
increased the more certain does it become that the aggregate of the
profits will exceed the aggregate of the losses. That is the simple
basis of the insurance-underwriting business.
Diversification is an established tenet of conservative invest-
ment. By accepting it so universally, investors are really demon-
strating their acceptance of the margin-of-safety principle, to which
diversification is the companion. This point may be made more col-
orful by a reference to the arithmetic of roulette. If a man bets $1 on
a single number, he is paid $35 profit when he wins—but the
chances are 37 to 1 that he will lose. He has a “negative margin of
safety.” In his case diversification is foolish. The more numbers he
bets on, the smaller his chance of ending with a profit. If he regu-
larly bets $1 on every number (including 0 and 00), he is certain to
lose $2 on each turn of the wheel. But suppose the winner received
$39 profit instead of $35. Then he would have a small but impor-
tant margin of safety. Therefore, the more numbers he wagers on,
518 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 533 =====
the better his chance of gain. And he could be certain of winning $2
on every spin by simply betting $1 each on all the numbers. (Inci-
dentally, the two examples given actually describe the respective
positions of the player and proprietor of a wheel with 0 and 00.)*
A Criterion of Investment versus Speculation
Since there is no single definition of investment in general
acceptance, authorities have the right to define it pretty much as
they please. Many of them deny that there is any useful or depend-
able difference between the concepts of investment and of specula-
tion. We think this skepticism is unnecessary and harmful. It is
injurious because it lends encouragement to the innate leaning of
many people toward the excitement and hazards of stock-market
speculation. We suggest that the margin-of-safety concept may be
used to advantage as the touchstone to distinguish an investment
operation from a speculative one.
Probably most speculators believe they have the odds in their
favor when they take their chances, and therefore they may lay
claim to a safety margin in their proceedings. Each one has the feel-
ing that the time is propitious for his purchase, or that his skill is
superior to the crowd’s, or that his adviser or system is trustwor-
thy. But such claims are unconvincing. They rest on subjective
judgment, unsupported by any body of favorable evidence or any
“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment 519
* In “American” roulette, most wheels include 0 and 00 along with numbers
1 through 36, for a total of 38 slots. The casino offers a maximum payout 
of 35 to 1. What if you bet $1 on every number? Since only one slot can 
be the one into which the ball drops, you would win $35 on that slot, but
lose $1 on each of your other 37 slots, for a net loss of $2. That $2 differ-
ence (or a 5.26% spread on your total $38 bet) is the casino’s “house
advantage, ” ensuring that, on average, roulette players will always lose more
than they win. Just as it is in the roulette player’s interest to bet as seldom as
possible, it is in the casino’s interest to keep the roulette wheel spinning.
Likewise, the intelligent investor should seek to maximize the number of
holdings that offer “a better chance for profit than for loss. ” For most
investors, diversification is the simplest and cheapest way to widen your
margin of safety.

===== PDF PAGE 534 =====
conclusive line of reasoning. We greatly doubt whether the man
who stakes money on his view that the market is heading up or
down can ever be said to be protected by a margin of safety in any
useful sense of the phrase.
By contrast, the investor’s concept of the margin of safety—as
developed earlier in this chapter—rests upon simple and definite
arithmetical reasoning from statistical data. We believe, also, that it
is well supported by practical investment experience. There is no
guarantee that this fundamental quantitative approach will con-
tinue to show favorable results under the unknown conditions of
the future. But, equally, there is no valid reason for pessimism on
this score.
Thus, in sum, we say that to have a true investment there must
be present a true margin of safety. And a true margin of safety is
one that can be demonstrated by figures, by persuasive reasoning,
and by reference to a body of actual experience.
Extension of the Concept of Investment
To complete our discussion of the margin-of-safety principle we
must now make a further distinction between conventional and
unconventional investments. Conventional investments are appro-
priate for the typical portfolio. Under this heading have always
come United States government issues and high-grade, dividend-
paying common stocks. We have added state and municipal bonds
for those who will benefit sufficiently by their tax-exempt features.
Also included are first-quality corporate bonds when, as now, they
can be bought to yield sufficiently more than United States savings
bonds.
Unconventional investments are those that are suitable only for
the enterprising investor. They cover a wide range. The broadest
category is that of undervalued common stocks of secondary com-
panies, which we recommend for purchase when they can be
bought at two-thirds or less of their indicated value. Besides these,
there is often a wide choice of medium-grade corporate bonds and
preferred stocks when they are selling at such depressed prices as
to be obtainable also at a considerable discount from their apparent
value. In these cases the average investor would be inclined to call
the securities speculative, because in his mind their lack of a first-
quality rating is synonymous with a lack of investment merit.
520 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 535 =====
It is our argument that a sufficiently low price can turn a secu-
rity of mediocre quality into a sound investment opportunity—
provided that the buyer is informed and experienced and that he
practices adequate diversification. For, if the price is low enough to
create a substantial margin of safety, the security thereby meets our
criterion of investment. Our favorite supporting illustration is
taken from the field of real-estate bonds. In the 1920s, billions of
dollars’ worth of these issues were sold at par and widely recom-
mended as sound investments. A large proportion had so little
margin of value over debt as to be in fact highly speculative in
character. In the depression of the 1930s an enormous quantity of
these bonds defaulted their interest, and their price collapsed—in
some cases below 10 cents on the dollar. At that stage the same
advisers who had recommended them at par as safe investments
were rejecting them as paper of the most speculative and unattrac-
tive type. But as a matter of fact the price depreciation of about 90%
made many of these securities exceedingly attractive and reason-
ably safe—for the true values behind them were four or five times
the market quotation.*
The fact that the purchase of these bonds actually resulted in
what is generally called “a large speculative profit” did not prevent
them from having true investment qualities at their low prices. The
“speculative” profit was the purchaser’s reward for having made
an unusually shrewd investment. They could properly be called
investment opportunities, since a careful analysis would have
shown that the excess of value over price provided a large margin
of safety. Thus the very class of “fair-weather investments” which
we stated above is a chief source of serious loss to naïve security
buyers is likely to afford many sound profit opportunities to the
sophisticated operator who may buy them later at pretty much his
own price.†
“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment 521
* Graham is saying that there is no such thing as a good or bad stock; there
are only cheap stocks and expensive stocks. Even the best company
becomes a “sell” when its stock price goes too high, while the worst com-
pany is worth buying if its stock goes low enough.
† The very people who considered technology and telecommunications
stocks a “sure thing” in late 1999 and early 2000, when they were hellishly
overpriced, shunned them as “too risky” in 2002—even (cont’d on p. 522)

===== PDF PAGE 536 =====
The whole field of “special situations” would come under our
definition of investment operations, because the purchase is
always predicated on a thoroughgoing analysis that promises a
larger realization than the price paid. Again there are risk factors in
each individual case, but these are allowed for in the calculations
and absorbed in the overall results of a diversified operation.
To carry this discussion to a logical extreme, we might suggest
that a defensible investment operation could be set up by buying
such intangible values as are represented by a group of “common-
stock option warrants” selling at historically low prices. (This
example is intended as somewhat of a shocker.)* The entire value
of these warrants rests on the possibility that the related stocks
may some day advance above the option price. At the moment
they have no exercisable value. Yet, since all investment rests on
reasonable future expectations, it is proper to view these warrants
in terms of the mathematical chances that some future bull market
will create a large increase in their indicated value and in their
price. Such a study might well yield the conclusion that there is
much more to be gained in such an operation than to be lost and
that the chances of an ultimate profit are much better than those of
an ultimate loss. If that is so, there is a safety margin present even
522 The Intelligent Investor
(cont’d from p. 521) though, in Graham’s exact words from an earlier
period, “the price depreciation of about 90% made many of these securities
exceedingly attractive and reasonably safe. ” Similarly, Wall Street’s analysts
have always tended to call a stock a “strong buy” when its price is high, and
to label it a “sell” after its price has fallen—the exact opposite of what Gra-
ham (and simple common sense) would dictate. As he does throughout the
book, Graham is distinguishing speculation—or buying on the hope that a
stock’s price will keep going up—from investing, or buying on the basis of
what the underlying business is worth.
* Graham uses “common-stock option warrant” as a synonym for “warrant, ”
a security issued directly by a corporation giving the holder a right to pur-
chase the company’s stock at a predetermined price. Warrants have been
almost entirely superseded by stock options. Graham quips that he intends
the example as a “shocker” because, even in his day, warrants were
regarded as one of the market’s seediest backwaters. (See the commentary
on Chapter 16.)

===== PDF PAGE 537 =====
in this unprepossessing security form. A sufficiently enterprising
investor could then include an option-warrant operation in his
miscellany of unconventional investments.1
To Sum Up
Investment is most intelligent when it is most businesslike. It is
amazing to see how many capable businessmen try to operate in
Wall Street with complete disregard of all the sound principles
through which they have gained success in their own undertak-
ings. Yet every corporate security may best be viewed, in the first
instance, as an ownership interest in, or a claim against, a specific
business enterprise. And if a person sets out to make profits from
security purchases and sales, he is embarking on a business ven-
ture of his own, which must be run in accordance with accepted
business principles if it is to have a chance of success.
The first and most obvious of these principles is, “Know what
you are doing—know your business.” For the investor this means:
Do not try to make “business profits” out of securities—that is,
returns in excess of normal interest and dividend income—unless
you know as much about security values as you would need to
know about the value of merchandise that you proposed to manu-
facture or deal in.
A second business principle: “Do not let anyone else run your
business, unless (1) you can supervise his performance with ade-
quate care and comprehension or (2) you have unusually strong rea-
sons for placing implicit confidence in his integrity and ability.” For
the investor this rule should determine the conditions under which
he will permit someone else to decide what is done with his money.
A third business principle: “Do not enter upon an operation—
that is, manufacturing or trading in an item—unless a reliable cal-
culation shows that it has a fair chance to yield a reasonable profit.
In particular, keep away from ventures in which you have little to
gain and much to lose.” For the enterprising investor this means
that his operations for profit should be based not on optimism but
on arithmetic. For every investor it means that when he limits his
return to a small figure—as formerly, at least, in a conventional
bond or preferred stock—he must demand convincing evidence
that he is not risking a substantial part of his principal.
“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment 523

===== PDF PAGE 538 =====
A fourth business rule is more positive: “Have the courage of
your knowledge and experience. If you have formed a conclusion
from the facts and if you know your judgment is sound, act on it—
even though others may hesitate or differ.” (You are neither right
nor wrong because the crowd disagrees with you. You are right
because your data and reasoning are right.) Similarly, in the world
of securities, courage becomes the supreme virtue after adequate
knowledge and a tested judgment are at hand.
Fortunately for the typical investor, it is by no means necessary
for his success that he bring these qualities to bear upon his pro-
gram—provided he limits his ambition to his capacity and confines
his activities within the safe and narrow path of standard, defen-
sive investment. To achieve satisfactory investment results is easier
than most people realize; to achieve superior results is harder than it
looks.
524 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 539 =====
COMMENTARY ON C HAPTER 20
If we fail to anticipate the unforeseen or expect the unexpected
in a universe of infinite possibilities, we may find ourselves at
the mercy of anyone or anything that cannot be programmed,
categorized, or easily referenced.
—Agent Fox Mulder, The X-Files
FIRST, DON’T LOSE
What is risk?
You’ll get different answers depending on whom, and when, you
ask. In 1999, risk didn’t mean losing money; it meant making less
money than someone else. What many people feared was bumping
into somebody at a barbecue who was getting even richer even
quicker by day trading dot-com stocks than they were. Then, quite
suddenly, by 2003 risk had come to mean that the stock market might
keep dropping until it wiped out whatever traces of wealth you still had
left.
While its meaning may seem nearly as fickle and fluctuating as the
financial markets themselves, risk has some profound and permanent
attributes. The people who take the biggest gambles and make the
biggest gains in a bull market are almost always the ones who get hurt
the worst in the bear market that inevitably follows. (Being “right”
makes speculators even more eager to take extra risk, as their confi-
dence catches fire.) And once you lose big money, you then have to
gamble even harder just to get back to where you were, like a race-
track or casino gambler who desperately doubles up after every bad
bet. Unless you are phenomenally lucky, that’s a recipe for disaster.
No wonder, when he was asked to sum up everything he had learned
in his long career about how to get rich, the legendary financier J. K.
525

===== PDF PAGE 540 =====
Klingenstein of Wertheim & Co. answered simply: “Don’t lose. ” 1 This
graph shows what he meant:
526 Commentary on Chapter 20
1 As recounted by investment consultant Charles Ellis in Jason Zweig, “Wall
Street’s Wisest Man, ” Money, June, 2001, pp. 49–52.
FIGURE 20-1
The Cost of Loss
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
123 4567 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8
Years
Value of $10,000 investment
5% return every year 50% loss in year one, 10% gain every year thereafter
Imagine that you find a stock that you think can grow at 10% a year even if
the market only grows 5% annually. Unfortunately, you are so enthusiastic
that you pay too high a price, and the stock loses 50% of its value the first
year. Even if the stock then generates double the market’s return, it will
take you more than 16 years to overtake the market—simply because you
paid too much, and lost too much, at the outset.
Losingsome money is an inevitable part of investing, and there’s noth-
ing you can do to prevent it. But, to be an intelligent investor, you must
take responsibility for ensuring that you never lose most or all of your
money. The Hindu goddess of wealth, Lakshmi, is often portrayed stand-
ing on tiptoe, ready to dart away in the blink of an eye. To keep her sym-

===== PDF PAGE 541 =====
bolically in place, some of Lakshmi’s devotees will lash her statue down
with strips of fabric or nail its feet to the floor. For the intelligent investor,
Graham’s “margin of safety” performs the same function: By refusing to
pay too much for an investment, you minimize the chances that your
wealth will ever disappear or suddenly be destroyed.
Consider this: Over the four quarters ending in December 1999,
JDS Uniphase Corp., the fiber-optics company, generated $673 mil-
lion in net sales, on which it lost $313 million. Its tangible assets
totaled $1.5 billion. Yet, on March 7 , 2000, JDS Uniphase’s stock hit
$153 a share, giving the company a total market value of roughly
$143 billion.2 And then, like most “New Era” stocks, it crashed. Any-
one who bought it that day and still clung to it at the end of 2002
faced these prospects:
Commentary on Chapter 20 527
2 JDS Uniphase’s share price has been adjusted for later splits.
FIGURE 20-2
Breaking Even Is Hard to Do
Average annual rates of return
10.2
12.3
15.7
22.6
29.5
43.3
84.6
18.5
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0 9 0
Number of years
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
40%
50%
If you had bought JDS Uniphase at its peak price of $153.421 on March 7,
2000, and still held it at year-end 2002 (when it closed at $2.47), how
long would it take you to get back to your purchase price at various annual
average rates of return?

===== PDF PAGE 542 =====
Even at a robust 10% annual rate of return, it will take more than 43
years to break even on this overpriced purchase!
THE RISK IS NOT IN OUR STOCKS, 
BUT IN OURSELVES
Risk exists in another dimension: inside you. If you overestimate 
how well you really understand an investment, or overstate your ability
to ride out a temporary plunge in prices, it doesn’t matter what you
own or how the market does. Ultimately, financial risk resides not in
what kinds of investments you have, but in what kind of investor you
are. If you want to know what risk really is, go to the nearest bathroom
and step up to the mirror. That’s risk, gazing back at you from the
glass.
As you look at yourself in the mirror, what should you watch for?
The Nobel-prize–winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman explains two
factors that characterize good decisions:
• “well-calibrated confidence” (do I understand this investment as
well as I think I do?)
• “correctly-anticipated regret” (how will I react if my analysis
turns out to be wrong?).
To find out whether your confidence is well-calibrated, look in the
mirror and ask yourself: “What is the likelihood that my analysis is
right?” Think carefully through these questions:
• How much experience do I have? What is my track record with
similar decisions in the past?
• What is the typical track record of other people who have tried
this in the past?3
• If I am buying, someone else is selling. How likely is it that I know
something that this other person (or company) does not know?
• If I am selling, someone else is buying. How likely is it that I know
something that this other person (or company) does not know?
528 Commentary on Chapter 20
3 No one who diligently researched the answer to this question, and hon-
estly accepted the results, would ever have day traded or bought IPOs.

===== PDF PAGE 543 =====
• Have I calculated how much this investment needs to go up for
me to break even after my taxes and costs of trading?
Next, look in the mirror to find out whether you are the kind of per-
son who correctly anticipates your regret. Start by asking: “Do I fully
understand the consequences if my analysis turns out to be wrong?”
Answer that question by considering these points:
• If I’m right, I could make a lot of money. But what if I’m wrong?
Based on the historical performance of similar investments, how
much could I lose?
• Do I have other investments that will tide me over if this decision
turns out to be wrong? Do I already hold stocks, bonds, or funds
with a proven record of going up when the kind of investment I’m
considering goes down? Am I putting too much of my capital at
risk with this new investment?
• When I tell myself, “You have a high tolerance for risk, ” how do I
know? Have I ever lost a lot of money on an investment? How did
it feel? Did I buy more, or did I bail out?
• Am I relying on my willpower alone to prevent me from panicking
at the wrong time? Or have I controlled my own behavior in
advance by diversifying, signing an investment contract, and dol-
lar-cost averaging?
You should always remember, in the words of the psychologist Paul
Slovic, that “risk is brewed from an equal dose of two ingredients—
probabilities and consequences. ”4 Before you invest, you must ensure
that you have realistically assessed your probability of being right and
how you will react to the consequences of being wrong.
PASCAL’S WAGER
The investment philosopher Peter Bernstein has another way of sum-
ming this up. He reaches back to Blaise Pascal, the great French
mathematician and theologian (1623–1662), who created a thought
Commentary on Chapter 20 529
4 Paul Slovic, “Informing and Educating the Public about Risk, ” Risk Analy-
sis, vol. 6, no. 4 (1986), p. 412.

===== PDF PAGE 544 =====
experiment in which an agnostic must gamble on whether or not God
exists. The ante this person must put up for the wager is his conduct
in this life; the ultimate payoff in the gamble is the fate of his soul in the
afterlife. In this wager, Pascal asserts, “reason cannot decide” the
probability of God’s existence. Either God exists or He does not—and
only faith, not reason, can answer that question. But while the proba-
bilities in Pascal’s wager are a toss-up, the consequences are per-
fectly clear and utterly certain. As Bernstein explains:
Suppose you act as though God is and [you] lead a life of virtue and
abstinence, when in fact there is no god. You will have passed up
some goodies in life, but there will be rewards as well. Now suppose
you act as though God is not and spend a life of sin, selfishness, and
lust when in fact God is. You may have had fun and thrills during the
relatively brief duration of your lifetime, but when the day of judgment
rolls around you are in big trouble.5
Concludes Bernstein: “In making decisions under conditions of
uncertainty, the consequences must dominate the probabilities. We
never know the future. ” Thus, as Graham has reminded you in every
chapter of this book, the intelligent investor must focus not just on get-
ting the analysis right. You must also ensure against loss if your analy-
sis turns out to be wrong—as even the best analyses will be at least
some of the time. The probability of making at least one mistake at
some point in your investing lifetime is virtually 100%, and those odds
are entirely out of your control. However, you do have control over the
consequences of being wrong. Many “investors” put essentially all of
their money into dot-com stocks in 1999; an online survey of 1,338
Americans by Money Magazine in 1999 found that nearly one-tenth of
them had at least 85% of their money in Internet stocks. By ignoring
Graham’s call for a margin of safety, these people took the wrong side
of Pascal’s wager. Certain that they knew the probabilities of being
530 Commentary on Chapter 20
5 “The Wager, ” in Blaise Pascal, Pensées (Penguin Books, London and 
New York, 1995), pp. 122–125; Peter L. Bernstein, Against the Gods (John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1996), pp. 68–70; Peter L. Bernstein, “Decision
Theory in Iambic Pentameter, ” Economics & Portfolio Strategy, January 1,
2003, p. 2.

===== PDF PAGE 545 =====
right, they did nothing to protect themselves against the conse-
quences of being wrong.
Simply by keeping your holdings permanently diversified, and refus-
ing to fling money at Mr. Market’s latest, craziest fashions, you can
ensure that the consequences of your mistakes will never be cata-
strophic. No matter what Mr. Market throws at you, you will always be
able to say, with a quiet confidence, “This, too, shall pass away. ”
Commentary on Chapter 20 531

===== PDF PAGE 546 =====
Postscript
We know very well two partners who spent a good part of their
lives handling their own and other people’s funds on Wall Street.
Some hard experience taught them it was better to be safe and care-
ful rather than to try to make all the money in the world. They
established a rather unique approach to security operations, which
combined good profit possibilities with sound values. They
avoided anything that appeared overpriced and were rather too
quick to dispose of issues that had advanced to levels they deemed
no longer attractive. Their portfolio was always well diversified,
with more than a hundred different issues represented. In this way
they did quite well through many years of ups and downs in the
general market; they averaged about 20% per annum on the sev-
eral millions of capital they had accepted for management, and
their clients were well pleased with the results.*
In the year in which the first edition of this book appeared an
opportunity was offered to the partners’ fund to purchase a half-
interest in a growing enterprise. For some reason the industry did
not have Wall Street appeal at the time and the deal had been turned
down by quite a few important houses. But the pair was impressed
by the company’s possibilities; what was decisive for them was that
the price was moderate in relation to current earnings and asset
value. The partners went ahead with the acquisition, amounting in
dollars to about one-fifth of their fund. They became closely identi-
fied with the new business interest, which prospered.†
532
* The two partners Graham coyly refers to are Jerome Newman and Ben-
jamin Graham himself.
† Graham is describing the Government Employees Insurance Co., or
GEICO, in which he and Newman purchased a 50% interest in 1948, right

===== PDF PAGE 547 =====
In fact it did so well that the price of its shares advanced to two
hundred times or more the price paid for the half-interest. The
advance far outstripped the actual growth in profits, and almost
from the start the quotation appeared much too high in terms of
the partners’ own investment standards. But since they regarded
the company as a sort of “family business,” they continued to
maintain a substantial ownership of the shares despite the spectac-
ular price rise. A large number of participants in their funds did the
same, and they became millionaires through their holding in this
one enterprise, plus later-organized affiliates.*
Ironically enough, the aggregate of profits accruing from this
single investment decision far exceeded the sum of all the others
realized through 20 years of wide-ranging operations in the part-
ners’ specialized fields, involving much investigation, endless pon-
dering, and countless individual decisions.
Are there morals to this story of value to the intelligent investor?
An obvious one is that there are several different ways to make 
and keep money in Wall Street. Another, not so obvious, is that 
one lucky break, or one supremely shrewd decision—can we tell
them apart?—may count for more than a lifetime of journeyman
efforts.1 But behind the luck, or the crucial decision, there must
usually exist a background of preparation and disciplined capacity.
One needs to be sufficiently established and recognized so that
these opportunities will knock at his particular door. One must
Postscript 533
around the time he finished writing The Intelligent Investor. The $712,500
that Graham and Newman put into GEICO was roughly 25% of their fund’s
assets at the time. Graham was a member of GEICO’s board of directors
for many years. In a nice twist of fate, Graham’s greatest student, Warren
Buffett, made an immense bet of his own on GEICO in 1976, by which time
the big insurer had slid to the brink of bankruptcy. It turned out to be one of
Buffett’s best investments as well.
* Because of a legal technicality, Graham and Newman were directed by the
U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission to “spin off, ” or distribute, Graham-
Newman Corp. ’s GEICO stake to the fund’s shareholders. An investor who
owned 100 shares of Graham-Newman at the beginning of 1948 (worth
$11,413) and who then held on to the GEICO distribution would have had
$1.66 million by 1972. GEICO’s “later-organized affiliates” included Gov-
ernment Employees Financial Corp. and Criterion Insurance Co.

===== PDF PAGE 548 =====
have the means, the judgment, and the courage to take advantage
of them.
Of course, we cannot promise a like spectacular experience to all
intelligent investors who remain both prudent and alert through
the years. We are not going to end with J. J. Raskob’s slogan that we
made fun of at the beginning: “Everybody can be rich.” But inter-
esting possibilities abound on the financial scene, and the intelli-
gent and enterprising investor should be able to find both
enjoyment and profit in this three-ring circus. Excitement is guar-
anteed.
534 The Intelligent Investor

===== PDF PAGE 549 =====
COMMENTARY ON POSTSCRIPT
Successful investing is about managing risk, not avoiding it. At first
glance, when you realize that Graham put 25% of his fund into a sin-
gle stock, you might think he was gambling rashly with his investors’
money. But then, when you discover that Graham had painstakingly
established that he could liquidate GEICO for at least what he paid
for it, it becomes clear that Graham was taking very little financial risk.
But he needed enormous courage to take the psychological risk of
such a big bet on so unknown a stock.1
And today’s headlines are full of fearful facts and unresolved risks:
the death of the 1990s bull market, sluggish economic growth, corpo-
rate fraud, the specters of terrorism and war. “Investors don’t like
uncertainty, ” a market strategist is intoning right now on financial TV or
in today’s newspaper. But investors have never liked uncertainty—and
yet it is the most fundamental and enduring condition of the investing
world. It always has been, and it always will be. At heart, “uncertainty”
and “investing” are synonyms. In the real world, no one has ever been
given the ability to see that any particular time is the best time to buy
stocks. Without a saving faith in the future, no one would ever invest at
all. To be an investor, you must be a believer in a better tomorrow.
The most literate of investors, Graham loved the story of Ulysses,
told through the poetry of Homer, Alfred Tennyson, and Dante. Late in
his life, Graham relished the scene in Dante’s Inferno when Ulysses
describes inspiring his crew to sail westward into the unknown waters
beyond the gates of Hercules:
535
1 Graham’s anecdote is also a powerful reminder that those of us who are
not as brilliant as he was must always diversify to protect against the risk of
putting too much money into a single investment. When Graham himself
admits that GEICO was a “lucky break, ” that’s a signal that most of us can-
not count on being able to find such a great opportunity. To keep investing
from decaying into gambling, you must diversify.

===== PDF PAGE 550 =====
“O brothers, ” I said, “who after a hundred thousand
perils have reached the west,
in this little waking vigil
that still remains to our senses,
let us not choose to avoid the experience
of the unpeopled world that lies behind the sun.
Consider the seeds from which you sprang:
You were made not to live like beasts,
but to seek virtue and understanding. ”
With this little oration I made my shipmates
so eager for the voyage
that it would have hurt to hold them back.
And we swung our stern toward the morning
and turned our oars into wings for the wild flight.2
Investing, too, is an adventure; the financial future is always an
uncharted world. With Graham as your guide, your lifelong investing
voyage should be as safe and confident as it is adventurous.
536 Commentary on Postscript
2 Dante Alighieri, The Inferno, Canto XXVI, lines 112–125, translated by
Jason Zweig.

===== PDF PAGE 551 =====
Appendixes
1. The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville
by Warren E. Buffett
EDITOR’S NOTE : This article is an edited transcript of a talk given at
Columbia University in 1984 commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of
Security Analysis, written by Benjamin Graham and David L. Dodd.
This specialized volume first introduced the ideas later popularized in
The Intelligent Investor. Buffett’s essay offers a fascinating study of how
Graham’s disciples have used Graham’s value investing approach to real-
ize phenomenal success in the stock market.
Is the Graham and Dodd “look for values with a significant
margin of safety relative to prices” approach to security analysis
out of date? Many of the professors who write textbooks today say
yes. They argue that the stock market is efficient; that is, that stock
prices reflect everything that is known about a company’s
prospects and about the state of the economy. There are no under-
valued stocks, these theorists argue, because there are smart secu-
rity analysts who utilize all available information to ensure
unfailingly appropriate prices. Investors who seem to beat the mar-
ket year after year are just lucky. “If prices fully reflect available
information, this sort of investment adeptness is ruled out,” writes
one of today’s textbook authors.
Well, maybe. But I want to present to you a group of investors
who have, year in and year out, beaten the Standard & Poor’s 500
stock index. The hypothesis that they do this by pure chance is at
537

===== PDF PAGE 552 =====
least worth examining. Crucial to this examination is the fact that
these winners were all well known to me and pre-identified as
superior investors, the most recent identification occurring over fif-
teen years ago. Absent this condition—that is, if I had just recently
searched among thousands of records to select a few names for you
this morning—I would advise you to stop reading right here. I
should add that all these records have been audited. And I should
further add that I have known many of those who have invested
with these managers, and the checks received by those participants
over the years have matched the stated records.
Before we begin this examination, I would like you to imagine a
national coin-flipping contest. Let’s assume we get 225 million
Americans up tomorrow morning and we ask them all to wager a
dollar. They go out in the morning at sunrise, and they all call the
flip of a coin. If they call correctly, they win a dollar from those who
called wrong. Each day the losers drop out, and on the subsequent
day the stakes build as all previous winnings are put on the line.
After ten flips on ten mornings, there will be approximately
220,000 people in the United States who have correctly called ten
flips in a row. They each will have won a little over $1,000.
Now this group will probably start getting a little puffed up
about this, human nature being what it is. They may try to be mod-
est, but at cocktail parties they will occasionally admit to attractive
members of the opposite sex what their technique is, and what
marvelous insights they bring to the field of flipping.
Assuming that the winners are getting the appropriate rewards
from the losers, in another ten days we will have 215 people who
have successfully called their coin flips 20 times in a row and who,
by this exercise, each have turned one dollar into a little over 
$1 million. $225 million would have been lost, $225 million would
have been won.
By then, this group will really lose their heads. They will proba-
bly write books on “How I Turned a Dollar into a Million in
Twenty Days Working Thirty Seconds a Morning.” Worse yet,
they’ll probably start jetting around the country attending semi-
nars on efficient coin-flipping and tackling skeptical professors
with, “If it can’t be done, why are there 215 of us?”
But then some business school professor will probably be 
rude enough to bring up the fact that if 225 million orangutans 
538 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 553 =====
had engaged in a similar exercise, the results would be much 
the same—215 egotistical orangutans with 20 straight winning
flips.
I would argue, however, that there are some important differ-
ences in the examples I am going to present. For one thing, if (a)
you had taken 225 million orangutans distributed roughly as the
U.S. population is; if (b) 215 winners were left after 20 days; and if
(c) you found that 40 came from a particular zoo in Omaha, you
would be pretty sure you were on to something. So you would
probably go out and ask the zookeeper about what he’s feeding
them, whether they had special exercises, what books they read,
and who knows what else. That is, if you found any really extraor-
dinary concentrations of success, you might want to see if you
could identify concentrations of unusual characteristics that might
be causal factors.
Scientific inquiry naturally follows such a pattern. If you were
trying to analyze possible causes of a rare type of cancer—with,
say, 1,500 cases a year in the United States—and you found that 400
of them occurred in some little mining town in Montana, you
would get very interested in the water there, or the occupation of
those afflicted, or other variables. You know that it’s not random
chance that 400 come from a small area. You would not necessarily
know the causal factors, but you would know where to search.
I submit to you that there are ways of defining an origin other
than geography. In addition to geographical origins, there can be
what I call an intellectual origin. I think you will find that a dispro-
portionate number of successful coin-flippers in the investment
world came from a very small intellectual village that could be
called Graham-and-Doddsville. A concentration of winners that
simply cannot be explained by chance can be traced to this particu-
lar intellectual village.
Conditions could exist that would make even that concentration
unimportant. Perhaps 100 people were simply imitating the coin-
flipping call of some terribly persuasive personality. When he
called heads, 100 followers automatically called that coin the same
way. If the leader was part of the 215 left at the end, the fact that
100 came from the same intellectual origin would mean nothing.
You would simply be identifying one case as a hundred cases. Sim-
ilarly, let’s assume that you lived in a strongly patriarchal society
Appendixes 539

===== PDF PAGE 554 =====
and every family in the United States conveniently consisted of ten
members. Further assume that the patriarchal culture was so
strong that, when the 225 million people went out the first day,
every member of the family identified with the father’s call. Now,
at the end of the 20-day period, you would have 215 winners, and
you would find that they came from only 21.5 families. Some naive
types might say that this indicates an enormous hereditary factor
as an explanation of successful coin-flipping. But, of course, it
would have no significance at all because it would simply mean
that you didn’t have 215 individual winners, but rather 21.5 ran-
domly distributed families who were winners.
In this group of successful investors that I want to consider,
there has been a common intellectual patriarch, Ben Graham. But
the children who left the house of this intellectual patriarch have
called their “flips” in very different ways. They have gone to differ-
ent places and bought and sold different stocks and companies, yet
they have had a combined record that simply can’t be explained by
random chance. It certainly cannot be explained by the fact that
they are all calling flips identically because a leader is signaling the
calls to make. The patriarch has merely set forth the intellectual
theory for making coin-calling decisions, but each student has
decided on his own manner of applying the theory.
The common intellectual theme of the investors from Graham-
and-Doddsville is this: they search for discrepancies between the
value of a business and the price of small pieces of that business in
the market. Essentially, they exploit those discrepancies without
the efficient market theorist’s concern as to whether the stocks are
bought on Monday or Thursday, or whether it is January or July,
etc. Incidentally, when businessmen buy businesses—which is just
what our Graham & Dodd investors are doing through the
medium of marketable stocks—I doubt that many are cranking
into their purchase decision the day of the week or the month in
which the transaction is going to occur. If it doesn’t make any dif-
ference whether all of a business is being bought on a Monday or a
Friday, I am baffled why academicians invest extensive time and
effort to see whether it makes a difference when buying small
pieces of those same businesses. Our Graham & Dodd investors,
needless to say, do not discuss beta, the capital asset pricing model,
or covariance in returns among securities. These are not subjects of
540 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 555 =====
any interest to them. In fact, most of them would have difficulty
defining those terms. The investors simply focus on two variables:
price and value.
I always find it extraordinary that so many studies are made of
price and volume behavior, the stuff of chartists. Can you imagine
buying an entire business simply because the price of the business
had been marked up substantially last week and the week before?
Of course, the reason a lot of studies are made of these price and
volume variables is that now, in the age of computers, there are
almost endless data available about them. It isn’t necessarily
because such studies have any utility; it’s simply that the data are
there and academicians have worked hard to learn the mathemati-
cal skills needed to manipulate them. Once these skills are
acquired, it seems sinful not to use them, even if the usage has no
utility or negative utility. As a friend said, to a man with a hammer,
everything looks like a nail.
I think the group that we have identified by a common intellec-
tual home is worthy of study. Incidentally, despite all the academic
studies of the influence of such variables as price, volume, season-
ality, capitalization size, etc., upon stock performance, no interest
has been evidenced in studying the methods of this unusual con-
centration of value-oriented winners.
I begin this study of results by going back to a group of four of
us who worked at Graham-Newman Corporation from 1954
through 1956. There were only four—I have not selected these
names from among thousands. I offered to go to work at Graham-
Newman for nothing after I took Ben Graham’s class, but he turned
me down as overvalued. He took this value stuff very seriously!
After much pestering he finally hired me. There were three part-
ners and four of us at the “peasant” level. All four left between
1955 and 1957 when the firm was wound up, and it’s possible to
trace the record of three.
The first example (see Table 1, pages 549–550) is that of Walter
Schloss. Walter never went to college, but took a course from Ben
Graham at night at the New York Institute of Finance. Walter left
Graham-Newman in 1955 and achieved the record shown here
over 28 years.
Here is what “Adam Smith”—after I told him about Walter—
wrote about him in Supermoney (1972):
Appendixes 541

===== PDF PAGE 556 =====
He has no connections or access to useful information. Practi-
cally no one in Wall Street knows him and he is not fed any ideas.
He looks up the numbers in the manuals and sends for the annual
reports, and that’s about it.
In introducing me to [Schloss] Warren had also, to my mind,
described himself. “He never forgets that he is handling other
people’s money and this reinforces his normal strong aversion to
loss.” He has total integrity and a realistic picture of himself.
Money is real to him and stocks are real—and from this flows an
attraction to the “margin of safety” principle.
Walter has diversified enormously, owning well over 100 stocks
currently. He knows how to identify securities that sell at consider-
ably less than their value to a private owner. And that’s all he does.
He doesn’t worry about whether it’s January, he doesn’t worry
about whether it’s Monday, he doesn’t worry about whether it’s an
election year. He simply says, if a business is worth a dollar and I
can buy it for 40 cents, something good may happen to me. And he
does it over and over and over again. He owns many more stocks
than I do—and is far less interested in the underlying nature of the
business: I don’t seem to have very much influence on Walter.
That’s one of his strengths; no one has much influence on him.
The second case is Tom Knapp, who also worked at Graham-
Newman with me. Tom was a chemistry major at Princeton before
the war; when he came back from the war, he was a beach bum.
And then one day he read that Dave Dodd was giving a night
course in investments at Columbia. Tom took it on a noncredit
basis, and he got so interested in the subject from taking that
course that he came up and enrolled at Columbia Business School,
where he got the MBA degree. He took Dodd’s course again, and
took Ben Graham’s course. Incidentally, 35 years later I called Tom
to ascertain some of the facts involved here and I found him on the
beach again. The only difference is that now he owns the beach!
In 1968 Tom Knapp and Ed Anderson, also a Graham disciple,
along with one or two other fellows of similar persuasion, formed
Tweedy, Browne Partners, and their investment results appear in
Table 2. Tweedy, Browne built that record with very wide diversifi-
cation. They occasionally bought control of businesses, but the
record of the passive investments is equal to the record of the con-
trol investments.
542 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 557 =====
Table 3 describes the third member of the group who formed
Buffett Partnership in 1957. The best thing he did was to quit in
1969. Since then, in a sense, Berkshire Hathaway has been a contin-
uation of the partnership in some respects. There is no single index
I can give you that I would feel would be a fair test of investment
management at Berkshire. But I think that any way you figure it, it
has been satisfactory.
Table 4 shows the record of the Sequoia Fund, which is managed
by a man whom I met in 1951 in Ben Graham’s class, Bill Ruane.
After getting out of Harvard Business School, he went to Wall
Street. Then he realized that he needed to get a real business educa-
tion so he came up to take Ben’s course at Columbia, where we met
in early 1951. Bill’s record from 1951 to 1970, working with rela-
tively small sums, was far better than average. When I wound up
Buffett Partnership I asked Bill if he would set up a fund to handle
all our partners, so he set up the Sequoia Fund. He set it up at a ter-
rible time, just when I was quitting. He went right into the two-tier
market and all the difficulties that made for comparative perfor-
mance for value-oriented investors. I am happy to say that my
partners, to an amazing degree, not only stayed with him but
added money, with the happy result shown.
There’s no hindsight involved here. Bill was the only person I
recommended to my partners, and I said at the time that if he
achieved a four-point-per-annum advantage over the Standard &
Poor’s, that would be solid performance. Bill has achieved well
over that, working with progressively larger sums of money. That
makes things much more difficult. Size is the anchor of perfor-
mance. There is no question about it. It doesn’t mean you can’t do
better than average when you get larger, but the margin shrinks.
And if you ever get so you’re managing two trillion dollars, and
that happens to be the amount of the total equity evaluation in the
economy, don’t think that you’ll do better than average!
I should add that in the records we’ve looked at so far, through-
out this whole period there was practically no duplication in these
portfolios. These are men who select securities based on discrepan-
cies between price and value, but they make their selections very
differently. Walter’s largest holdings have been such stalwarts as
Hudson Pulp & Paper and Jeddo Highland Coal and New York
Trap Rock Company and all those other names that come instantly
to mind to even a casual reader of the business pages. Tweedy
Appendixes 543

===== PDF PAGE 558 =====
Browne’s selections have sunk even well below that level in terms
of name recognition. On the other hand, Bill has worked with big
companies. The overlap among these portfolios has been very, very
low. These records do not reflect one guy calling the flip and fifty
people yelling out the same thing after him.
Table 5 is the record of a friend of mine who is a Harvard Law
graduate, who set up a major law firm. I ran into him in about 1960
and told him that law was fine as a hobby but he could do better.
He set up a partnership quite the opposite of Walter’s. His portfo-
lio was concentrated in very few securities and therefore his record
was much more volatile but it was based on the same discount-
from-value approach. He was willing to accept greater peaks and
valleys of performance, and he happens to be a fellow whose
whole psyche goes toward concentration, with the results shown.
Incidentally, this record belongs to Charlie Munger, my partner 
for a long time in the operation of Berkshire Hathaway. When he 
ran his partnership, however, his portfolio holdings were almost
completely different from mine and the other fellows mentioned
earlier.
Table 6 is the record of a fellow who was a pal of Charlie
Munger’s—another non–business school type—who was a math
major at USC. He went to work for IBM after graduation and was
an IBM salesman for a while. After I got to Charlie, Charlie got to
him. This happens to be the record of Rick Guerin. Rick, from 1965
to 1983, against a compounded gain of 316 percent for the S&P ,
came off with 22,200 percent, which, probably because he lacks a
business school education, he regards as statistically significant.
One sidelight here: it is extraordinary to me that the idea of buy-
ing dollar bills for 40 cents takes immediately with people or it
doesn’t take at all. It’s like an inoculation. If it doesn’t grab a per-
son right away, I find that you can talk to him for years and show
him records, and it doesn’t make any difference. They just don’t
seem able to grasp the concept, simple as it is. A fellow like Rick
Guerin, who had no formal education in business, understands
immediately the value approach to investing and he’s applying it
five minutes later. I’ve never seen anyone who became a gradual
convert over a ten-year period to this approach. It doesn’t seem to
be a matter of IQ or academic training. It’s instant recognition, or it
is nothing.
544 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 559 =====
Table 7 is the record of Stan Perlmeter. Stan was a liberal arts
major at the University of Michigan who was a partner in the
advertising agency of Bozell & Jacobs. We happened to be in the
same building in Omaha. In 1965 he figured out I had a better busi-
ness than he did, so he left advertising. Again, it took five minutes
for Stan to embrace the value approach.
Perlmeter does not own what Walter Schloss owns. He does not
own what Bill Ruane owns. These are records made independently.
But every time Perlmeter buys a stock it’s because he’s getting
more for his money than he’s paying. That’s the only thing he’s
thinking about. He’s not looking at quarterly earnings projections,
he’s not looking at next year’s earnings, he’s not thinking about
what day of the week it is, he doesn’t care what investment
research from any place says, he’s not interested in price momen-
tum, volume, or anything. He’s simply asking: What is the busi-
ness worth?
Table 8 and Table 9 are the records of two pension funds I’ve been
involved in. They are not selected from dozens of pension funds with
which I have had involvement; they are the only two I have influ-
enced. In both cases I have steered them toward value-oriented man-
agers. Very, very few pension funds are managed from a value
standpoint. Table 8 is the Washington Post Company’s Pension
Fund. It was with a large bank some years ago, and I suggested that
they would do well to select managers who had a value orientation.
As you can see, overall they have been in the top percentile ever
since they made the change. The Post told the managers to keep at
least 25 percent of these funds in bonds, which would not have
been necessarily the choice of these managers. So I’ve included the
bond performance simply to illustrate that this group has no par-
ticular expertise about bonds. They wouldn’t have said they did.
Even with this drag of 25 percent of their fund in an area that was
not their game, they were in the top percentile of fund manage-
ment. The Washington Post experience does not cover a terribly
long period but it does represent many investment decisions by
three managers who were not identified retroactively.
Table 9 is the record of the FMC Corporation fund. I don’t man-
age a dime of it myself but I did, in 1974, influence their decision to
select value-oriented managers. Prior to that time they had selected
managers much the same way as most larger companies. They now
Appendixes 545

===== PDF PAGE 560 =====
rank number one in the Becker survey of pension funds for their
size over the period of time subsequent to this “conversion” to the
value approach. Last year they had eight equity managers of any
duration beyond a year. Seven of them had a cumulative record
better than the S&P . All eight had a better record last year than the
S&P . The net difference now between a median performance and
the actual performance of the FMC fund over this period is $243
million. FMC attributes this to the mindset given to them about the
selection of managers. Those managers are not the managers I
would necessarily select but they have the common denominator
of selecting securities based on value.
So these are nine records of “coin-flippers” from Graham-and-
Doddsville. I haven’t selected them with hindsight from among
thousands. It’s not like I am reciting to you the names of a bunch of
lottery winners—people I had never heard of before they won the
lottery. I selected these men years ago based upon their framework
for investment decision-making. I knew what they had been taught
and additionally I had some personal knowledge of their intellect,
character, and temperament. It’s very important to understand that
this group has assumed far less risk than average; note their record
in years when the general market was weak. While they differ
greatly in style, these investors are, mentally, always buying the
business, not buying the stock. A few of them sometimes buy whole
businesses. Far more often they simply buy small pieces of busi-
nesses. Their attitude, whether buying all or a tiny piece of a busi-
ness, is the same. Some of them hold portfolios with dozens of
stocks; others concentrate on a handful. But all exploit the differ-
ence between the market price of a business and its intrinsic value.
I’m convinced that there is much inefficiency in the market.
These Graham-and-Doddsville investors have successfully ex-
ploited gaps between price and value. When the price of a stock
can be influenced by a “herd” on Wall Street with prices set at the
margin by the most emotional person, or the greediest person, or
the most depressed person, it is hard to argue that the market
always prices rationally. In fact, market prices are frequently non-
sensical.
I would like to say one important thing about risk and reward.
Sometimes risk and reward are correlated in a positive fashion. If
someone were to say to me, “I have here a six-shooter and I have
546 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 561 =====
slipped one cartridge into it. Why don’t you just spin it and pull it
once? If you survive, I will give you $1 million.” I would decline—
perhaps stating that $1 million is not enough. Then he might offer
me $5 million to pull the trigger twice—now that would be a posi-
tive correlation between risk and reward!
The exact opposite is true with value investing. If you buy a dol-
lar bill for 60 cents, it’s riskier than if you buy a dollar bill for 
40 cents, but the expectation of reward is greater in the latter case.
The greater the potential for reward in the value portfolio, the less
risk there is.
One quick example: The Washington Post Company in 1973 was
selling for $80 million in the market. At the time, that day, you
could have sold the assets to any one of ten buyers for not less than
$400 million, probably appreciably more. The company owned the
Post, Newsweek, plus several television stations in major markets.
Those same properties are worth $2 billion now, so the person who
would have paid $400 million would not have been crazy.
Now, if the stock had declined even further to a price that made
the valuation $40 million instead of $80 million, its beta would
have been greater. And to people who think beta measures risk, the
cheaper price would have made it look riskier. This is truly Alice in
Wonderland. I have never been able to figure out why it’s riskier to
buy $400 million worth of properties for $40 million than $80 mil-
lion. And, as a matter of fact, if you buy a group of such securities
and you know anything at all about business valuation, there is
essentially no risk in buying $400 million for $80 million, particu-
larly if you do it by buying ten $40 million piles for $8 million each.
Since you don’t have your hands on the $400 million, you want to
be sure you are in with honest and reasonably competent people,
but that’s not a difficult job.
You also have to have the knowledge to enable you to make a
very general estimate about the value of the underlying businesses.
But you do not cut it close. That is what Ben Graham meant by
having a margin of safety. You don’t try and buy businesses worth
$83 million for $80 million. You leave yourself an enormous mar-
gin. When you build a bridge, you insist it can carry 30,000
pounds, but you only drive 10,000-pound trucks across it. And that
same principle works in investing.
In conclusion, some of the more commercially minded among
Appendixes 547

===== PDF PAGE 562 =====
you may wonder why I am writing this article. Adding many con-
verts to the value approach will perforce narrow the spreads
between price and value. I can only tell you that the secret has been
out for 50 years, ever since Ben Graham and Dave Dodd wrote
Security Analysis, yet I have seen no trend toward value investing
in the 35 years that I’ve practiced it. There seems to be some per-
verse human characteristic that likes to make easy things difficult.
The academic world, if anything, has actually backed away from
the teaching of value investing over the last 30 years. It’s likely to
continue that way. Ships will sail around the world but the Flat
Earth Society will flourish. There will continue to be wide discrep-
ancies between price and value in the marketplace, and those who
read their Graham & Dodd will continue to prosper.
Tables 1–9 follow:
548 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 563 =====
TABLE 1 Walter J. Schloss
1956 7.5 5.1 6.8 Standar d & Poor’s 281⁄4 year compounded gain 887.2%
1957 –10.5 –4.7 –4.7
1958 42.1 42.1 54.6 WJS Limited Partners 28 1⁄4 year compounded gain 6,678.8%
1959 12.7 17.5 23.3
1960 –1.6 7.0 9.3 WJS Partnership 28 1⁄4 year compounded gain 23,104.7%
1961 26.4 21.6 28.8
1962 –10.2 8.3 11.1 Standar d & Poor’s 281⁄4 year annual compounded rate 8.4%
1963 23.3 15.1 20.1
1964 16.5 17.1 22.8 WJS Limited Partners 28 1⁄4 year annual compounded rate 16.1%
1965 13.1 26.8 35.7
1966 –10.4 0.5 0.7 WJS Partnership 28 1⁄4 year annual compounded rate 21.3%
1967 26.8 25.8 34.4
1968 10.6 26.6 35.5 During the history of the Partnership it has owned over 800 issues
and, at most times, has had at least 100 positions. Present assets under
management approximate $45 million. The difference between returns
of the partnership and returns of the limited partners is due to alloca-
tions to the general partner for management.
S&P
Overall
Gain,
Including
Dividends
(%)
WJS Ltd
Partners
Overall
Gain
per year 
(%)
WJS
Partnership
Overall
Gain
per year
(%)Year

===== PDF PAGE 564 =====
TABLE 1 Walter J. Schloss (continued)
1969 –7.5 –9.0 –9.0
1970 2.4 –8.2 –8.2
1971 14.9 25.5 28.3
1972 19.8 11.6 15.5
1973 –14.8 –8.0 –8.0
1974 –26.6 –6.2 –6.2
1975 36.9 42.7 52.2
1976 22.4 29.4 39.2
1977 –8.6 25.8 34.4
1978 7.0 36.6 48.8
1979 17.6 29.8 39.7
1980 32.1 23.3 31.1
1981 6.7 18.4 24.5
1982 20.2 24.1 32.1
1983 22.8 38.4 51.2
1984 1st Qtr. 2.3 0.8 1.1
S&P
Overall
Gain,
Including
Dividends
(%)
WJS Ltd
Partners
Overall
Gain
per year 
(%)
WJS
Partnership
Overall
Gain
per year
(%)Year

===== PDF PAGE 565 =====
Appendixes 551
TABLE 2 Tweedy, Browne Inc.
1968 (9 mos.) 6.0 8.8 27.6 22.0
1969 –9.5 –6.2 12.7 10.0
1970 –2.5 –6.1 –1.3 –1.9
1971 20.7 20.4 20.9 16.1
1972 11.0 15.5 14.6 11.8
1973 2.9 1.0 8.3 7.5
1974 –31.8 –38.1 1.5 1.5
1975 36.9 37.8 28.8 22.0
1976 29.6 30.1 40.2 32.8
1977 –9.9 –4.0 23.4 18.7
1978 8.3 11.9 41.0 32.1
1979 7.9 12.7 25.5 20.5
1980 13.0 21.1 21.4 17.3
1981 –3.3 2.7 14.4 11.6
1982 12.5 10.1 10.2 8.2
1983 44.5 44.3 35.0 28.2
Total Return
153⁄4 years 191.8% 238.5% 1,661.2% 936.4%
Standard & Poor’s 153⁄4 year annual compounded rate 7.0%
TBK Limited Partners 153⁄4 year annual compounded rate 16.0%
TBK Overall 153⁄4 year annual compounded rate 20.0%
* Includes dividends paid for both Standard & Poor’s 500 Composite Index and
Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Period Ended
(September 30)
Dow
Jones*
(%)
S & P
500*
(%)
TBK
Overall
(%)
TBK
Limited
Partners
(%)

===== PDF PAGE 566 =====
552 Appendixes
TABLE 3 Buffett Partnership, Ltd.
Limited
Partners’
Results
(%)Year
Overall
Results
From
Dow
(%)
Partnership
Results
(%)
1957 –8.4 10.4 9.3
1958 38.5 40.9 32.2
1959 20.0 25.9 20.9
1960 –6.2 22.8 18.6
1961 22.4 45.9 35.9
1962 –7.6 13.9 11.9
1963 20.6 38.7 30.5
1964 18.7 27.8 22.3
1965 14.2 47.2 36.9
1966 –15.6 20.4 16.8
1967 19.0 35.9 28.4
1968 7.7 58.8 45.6
1969 –11.6 6.8 6.6
On a cumulative or compounded basis, the results are:
1957 –8.4 10.4 9.3
1957–58 26.9 55.6 44.5
1957–59 52.3 95.9 74.7
1957–60 42.9 140.6 107.2
1957–61 74.9 251.0 181.6
1957–62 61.6 299.8 215.1
1957–63 94.9 454.5 311.2
1957–64 131.3 608.7 402.9
1957–65 164.1 943.2 588.5
1957–66 122.9 1156.0 704.2
1957–67 165.3 1606.9 932.6
1957–68 185.7 2610.6 1403.5
1957–69 152.6 2794.9 1502.7
Annual Compounded Rate 7.4 29.5 23.8

===== PDF PAGE 567 =====
Appendixes 553
TABLE 4 Sequoia Fund, Inc.
Year
Annual Percentage Change**
Sequoia
Fund
(%)
S&P 500
Index *
(%)
1970 (from July 15) 12.1 20.6
1971 13.5 14.3
1972 3.7 18.9
1973 –24.0 –14.8
1974 –15.7 –26.4
1975 60.5 37.2
1976 72.3 23.6
1977 19.9 –7.4
1978 23.9 6.4
1979 12.1 18.2
1980 12.6 32.3
1981 21.5 –5.0
1982 31.2 21.4
1983 27.3 22.4
1984 (first quarter) –1.6 –2.4
Entire Period 775.3% 270.0%
Compound Annual Return 17.2% 10.0%
Plus 1% Management Fee 1.0%
Gross Investment Return 18.2% 10.0%
* Includes dividends (and capital gains distributions in the case of Sequoia Fund)
treated as though reinvested.
** These figures differ slightly from the S&P figures in Table 1 because of a differ-
ence in calculation of reinvested dividends.

===== PDF PAGE 568 =====
TABLE 5 Charles Munger
Mass. Inv. Investors Lehman Tri–Cont. Dow Overall Limited 
Year Trust (%) Stock (%) (%) (%) (%) Partnership (%) Partners (%)
Yearly Results (1)
1962 –9.8 –13.4 –14.4 –12.2 –7.6 30.1 20.1
1963 20.0 16.5 23.8 20.3 20.6 71.7 47.8
1964 15.9 14.3 13.6 13.3 18.7 49.7 33.1
1965 10.2 9.8 19.0 10.7 14.2 8.4 6.0
1966 –7.7 –9.9 –2.6 –6.9 –15.7 12.4 8.3
1967 20.0 22.8 28.0 25.4 19.0 56.2 37.5
1968 10.3 8.1 6.7 6.8 7.7 40.4 27.0
1969 –4.8 –7.9 –1.9 0.1 –11.6 28.3 21.3
1970 0.6 –4.1 –7.2 –1.0 8.7 –0.1 –0.1
1971 9.0 16.8 26.6 22.4 9.8 25.4 20.6
1972 11.0 15.2 23.7 21.4 18.2 8.3 7.3
1973 –12.5 –17.6 –14.3 –21.3 –23.1 – 31.9 –31.9
1974 –25.5 –25.6 –30.3 –27.6 –13.1 –31.5 – 31.5
1975 32.9 33.3 30.8 35.4 44.4 73.2 73.2

===== PDF PAGE 569 =====
Compound Results (2)
1962 –9.8 –13.4 –14.4 –12.2 –7.6 30.1 20.1
1962–3 8.2 0.9 6.0 5.6 11.5 123.4 77.5
1962–4 25.4 15.3 20.4 19.6 32.4 234.4 136.3
1962–5 38.2 26.6 43.3 32.4 51.2 262.5 150.5
1962–6 27.5 14.1 39.5 23.2 27.5 307.5 171.3
1962–7 53.0 40.1 78.5 54.5 51.8 536.5 273.0
1962–8 68.8 51.4 90.5 65.0 63.5 793.6 373.7
1962–9 60.7 39.4 86.9 65.2 44.5 1046.5 474.6
1962–70 61.7 33.7 73.4 63.5 57.1 1045.4 474.0
1962–71 76.3 56.2 119.5 100.1 72.5 1336.3 592.2
1962–72 95.7 79.9 171.5 142.9 103.9 1455.5 642.7
1962–73 71.2 48.2 132.7 91.2 77.2 959.3 405.8
1962–74 27.5 40.3 62.2 38.4 36.3 625.6 246.5
1962–75 69.4 47.0 112.2 87.4 96.8 1156.7 500.1
Average Annual Compounded Rate 3.8 2.8 5.5 4.6 5.0 19.8 13.7

===== PDF PAGE 570 =====
556 Appendixes
TABLE 6 Pacific Partners, Ltd.
Limited Overall 
S & P 500 Partnership Partnership 
Year Index (%) Results (%) Results (%)
1965 12.4 21.2 32.0
1966 –10.1 24.5 36.7
1967 23.9 120.1 180.1
1968 11.0 114.6 171.9
1969 –8.4 64.7 97.1
1970 3.9 –7.2 –7.2
1971 14.6 10.9 16.4
1972 18.9 12.8 17.1
1973 –14.8 –42.1 –42.1
1974 –26.4 –34.4 –34.4
1975 37.2 23.4 31.2
1976 23.6 127.8 127.8
1977 –7.4 20.3 27.1
1978 6.4 28.4 37.9
1979 18.2 36.1 48.2
1980 32.3 18.1 24.1
1981 –5.0 6.0 8.0
1982 21.4 24.0 32.0
1983 22.4 18.6 24.8
Standard & Poor’s 19 year compounded gain 316.4%
Limited Partners 19 year compounded gain 5,530.2%
Overall Partnership 19 year compounded gain 22,200.0%
Standard & Poor’s 19 year annual compounded rate 7.8%
Limited Partners 19 year annual compounded rate 23.6%
Overall Partnership 19 year annual compounded rate 32.9%

===== PDF PAGE 571 =====
TABLE 7 Perlmeter Investments
PIL Limited 
Year Overall (%) Partner (%)
8/1–12/31/65 40.6 32.5
1966 6.4 5.1
1967 73.5 58.8
1968 65.0 52.0
1969 –13.8 –13.8
1970 –6.0 –6.0
1971 55.7 49.3
1972 23.6 18.9
1973 –28.1 –28.1
1974 –12.0 –12.0
1975 38.5 38.5
1/1–10/31/76 38.2 34.5
11/1/76–10/31/77 30.3 25.5
11/1/77–10/31/78 31.8 26.6
11/1/78–10/31/79 34.7 28.9
11/1/79–10/31/80 41.8 34.7
11/1/80–10/31/81 4.0 3.3
11/1/81–10/31/82 29.8 25.4
11/1/82–10/31/83 22.2 18.4
Total Partnership Percentage Gain 8/1/65 through 10/31/83 4277.2%
Limited Partners Percentage Gain 8/1/65 through 10/31/83 2309.5%
Annual Compound Rate of Gain Overall Partnership 23.0%
Annual Compound Rate of Gain Limited Partners 19.0%
Dow Jones Industrial Average 7/31/65 (Approximate) 882
Dow Jones Industrial Average 10/31/83 (Approximate) 1225
Approximate Compound Rate of Gain of DJI including dividends 7%

===== PDF PAGE 572 =====
TABLE 8 The Washington Post Company, Master Trust, December 31, 1983
Current Quarter Year Ended 2 Years Ended* 3 Y ears Ended* 5 Years Ended*
% Ret. Rank % Ret. Rank % Ret. Rank % Ret. Rank % Ret. Rank
All Investments
Manager A 4.1 2 22.5 10 20.6 40 18.0 10 20.2 3
Manager B 3.2 4 34.1 1 33.0 1 28.2 1 22.6 1
Manager C 5.4 1 22.2 11 28.4 3 24.5 1 — —
Master Trust (All Managers) 3.9 1 28.1 1 28.2 1 24.3 1 21.8 1
Common Stock
Manager A 5.2 1 32.1 9 26.1 27 21.2 11 26.5 7
Manager B 3.6 5 52.9 1 46.2 1 37.8 1 29.3 3
Manager C 6.2 1 29.3 14 30.8 10 29.3 3 — —
Master Trust (All Managers) 4.7 1 41.2 1 37.0 1 30.4 1 27.6 1
Bonds
Manager A 2.7 8 17.0 1 26.6 1 19.0 1 12.2 2
Manager B 1.6 46 7.6 48 18.3 53 12.7 84 7.4 86
Manager C 3.2 4 10.4 9 24.0 3 18.9 1 — —
Master Trust (All Managers) 2.2 11 9.7 14 21.1 14 15.2 24 9.3 30
Bonds & Cash Equivalents
Manager A 2.5 15 12.0 5 16.1 64 15.5 21 12.9 9
Manager B 2.1 28 9.2 29 17.1 47 14.7 41 10.8 44
Manager C 3.1 6 10.2 17 22.0 2 21.6 1 — —
Master Trust (All Managers) 2.4 14 10.2 17 17.8 20 16.2 2 12.5 9
* Annualized
Rank indicates the fund’s performance against the A.C. Becker universe.
Rank is stated as a percentile: 1 = best performance, 100 = worst.

===== PDF PAGE 573 =====
TABLE 9 FMC Corporation Pension Fund, Annual Rate of Return (Percent)
Period ending 1 Year 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years 5 Years 6 Years 7 Years 8 Years 9 Years
FMC (Bonds and Equities Combined)
1983 23.0 *17.1
1982 22.8 13.6 16.0 16.6 15.5 12.3 13.9 16.3
1981 5.4 13.0 15.3 13.8 10.5 12.6 15.4
1980 21.0 19.7 16.8 11.7 14.0 17.3
1979 18.4 14.7 8.7 12.3 16.5
1978 11.2 4.2 10.4 16.1
1977 –2.3 9.8 17.8
1976 23.8 29.3
1975 35.0 * 18.5 from equities only
Becker large plan median
1983 15.6 12.6
1982 21.4 11.2 13.9 13.9 12.5 9.7 10.9 12.3
1981 1.2 10.8 11.9 10.3 7.7 8.9 10.9
1980 20.9 NA NA NA 10.8 NA
1979 13.7 NA NA NA 11.1
1978 6.5 NA NA NA
1977 –3.3 NA NA
1976 17.0 NA
1975 24.1

===== PDF PAGE 574 =====
TABLE 9 FMC Corporation Pension Fund, Annual Rate of Return (Percent) (continued)
Period ending 1 Year 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years 5 Years 6 Years 7 Years 8 Years 9 Years
S&P 500
1983 22.8 15.6
1982 21.5 7.3 15.1 16.0 14.0 10.2 12.0 14.9
1981 –5.0 12.0 14.2 12.2 8.1 10.5 14.0
1980 32.5 25.3 18.7 11.7 14.0 17.5
1979 18.6 12.4 5.5 9.8 14.8
1978 6.6 –0.8 6.8 13.7
1977 7.7 6.9 16.1
1976 23.7 30.3
1975 37.2

===== PDF PAGE 575 =====
2. Important Rules Concerning Taxability of Investment
Income and Security Transactions (in 1972)
Editor’s note: Due to extensive changes in the rules governing such
transactions, the following document is presented here for historical
purposes only. When first written by Benjamin Graham in 1972, all the
information therein was correct. However, intervening developments
have rendered this document inaccurate for today’s purposes. Follow-
ing Graham’s original Appendix 2 is a revised and updated version of
“The Basics of Investment Taxation, ” which brings the reader up-to-
date on the relevant rules.
Rule 1—Interest and Dividends
Interest and dividends are taxable as ordinary income except (a)
income received from state, municipal, and similar obligations,
which are free from Federal tax but may be subject to state tax, (b)
dividends representing a return of capital, (c) certain dividends
paid by investment companies (see below), and (d) the first $100 of
ordinary domestic-corporation dividends.
Rule 2—Capital Gains and Losses
Short-term capital gains and losses are merged to obtain net
short-term capital gain or loss. Long-term capital gains and losses
are merged to obtain the net long-term capital gain or loss. If the
net short-term capital gain exceeds the net long-term capital loss,
100 per cent of such excess shall be included in income. The maxi-
mum tax thereon is 25% up to $50,000 of such gains and 35% on the
balance.
A net capital loss (the amount exceeding capital gains) is
deductible from ordinary income to a maximum of $1,000 in the
current year and in each of the next five years. Alternatively,
unused losses may be applied at any time to offset capital gains.
(Carry-overs of losses taken before 1970 are treated more liberally
than later losses.)
Note Concerning “Regulated Investment Companies”
Most investment funds (“investment companies”) take advan-
tage of special provisions of the tax law, which enable them to be
Appendixes 561

===== PDF PAGE 576 =====
taxed substantially as partnerships. Thus if they make long-term
security profits they can distribute these as “capital-gain divi-
dends,” which are reported by their shareholders in the same way
as long-term gains. These carry a lower tax rate than ordinary divi-
dends. Alternatively, such a company may elect to pay the 25% tax
for the account of its shareholders and then retain the balance of
the capital gains without distributing them as capital-gain divi-
dends.
3. The Basics of Investment Taxation (Updated as of 2003)
Interest and Dividends
Interest and dividends are taxed at your ordinary-income tax rate
except (a) interest received from municipal bonds, which is free from
Federal income tax but may be subject to state tax, (b) dividends rep-
resenting a return of capital, and (c) long-term capital-gain distribu-
tions paid by mutual funds (see below). Private-activity municipal
bonds, even within a mutual fund, may subject you to the Federal alter-
native minimum tax.
Capital Gains and Losses
Short-term capital gains and losses are merged to obtain net short-
term capital gain or loss. Long-term capital gains and losses are
merged to determine your net long-term capital gain or loss. If your net
short-term capital gain exceeds the net long-term capital loss, that
excess is counted as ordinary income. If there is a net long-term capi-
tal gain, it is taxed at the favorable capital gains rate, generally 20%—
which will fall to 18% for investments purchased after December 31,
2000, and held for more than five years.
A net capital loss is deductible from ordinary income to a maxim-
um of $3,000 in the current year. Any capital losses in excess of
$3,000 may be applied in later tax years to offset future capital 
gains.
Mutual Funds
As “regulated investment companies, ” nearly all mutual funds take
advantage of special provisions of the tax law that exempt them from
562 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 577 =====
corporate income tax. After selling long-term holdings, mutual funds
can distribute the profits as “capital-gain dividends, ” which their share-
holders treat as long-term gains. These are taxed at a lower rate (gen-
erally 20%) than ordinary dividends (up to 39%). You should generally
avoid making large new investments during the fourth quarter of each
year, when these capital-gain distributions are usually distributed; oth-
erwise you will incur tax for a gain earned by the fund before you even
owned it.
4. The New Speculation in Common Stocks1
What I shall have to say will reflect the spending of many years
in Wall Street, with their attendant varieties of experience. This has
included the recurrent advent of new conditions, or a new atmo-
sphere, which challenge the value of experience itself. It is true that
one of the elements that distinguish economics, finance, and secu-
rity analysis from other practical disciplines is the uncertain valid-
ity of past phenomena as a guide to the present and future. Yet we
have no right to reject the lessons of the past until we have at least
studied and understood them. My address today is an effort
toward such understanding in a limited field—in particular, an
endeavor to point out some contrasting relationships between the
present and the past in our underlying attitudes toward invest-
ment and speculation in common stocks.
Let me start with a summary of my thesis. In the past the specu-
lative elements of a common stock resided almost exclusively in
the company itself; they were due to uncertainties, or fluctuating
elements, or downright weaknesses in the industry, or the corpora-
tion’s individual setup. These elements of speculation still exist, of
course; but it may be said that they have been sensibly diminished
by a number of long-term developments to which I shall refer. But
in revenge a new and major element of speculation has been intro-
duced into the common-stock arena from outside the companies. It
comes from the attitude and viewpoint of the stock-buying public
and their advisers—chiefly us security analysts. This attitude may
be described in a phrase: primary emphasis upon future expecta-
tions.
Nothing will appear more logical and natural to this audience
than the idea that a common stock should be valued and priced
Appendixes 563

===== PDF PAGE 578 =====
primarily on the basis of the company’s expected future perfor-
mance. Yet this simple-appearing concept carries with it a number
of paradoxes and pitfalls. For one thing, it obliterates a good part of
the older, well-established distinctions between investment and
speculation. The dictionary says that “speculate” comes from the
Latin “specula,” a lookout. Thus it was the speculator who looked
out and saw future developments coming before other people did.
But today, if the investor is shrewd or well advised, he too must
have his lookout on the future, or rather he mounts into a common
lookout where he rubs elbows with the speculator.
Secondly, we find that, for the most part, companies with the
best investment characteristics—i.e., the best credit rating—are the
ones which are likely to attract the largest speculative interest in
their common stocks, since everyone assumes they are guaranteed
a brilliant future. Thirdly, the concept of future prospects, and par-
ticularly of continued growth in the future, invites the application
of formulas out of higher mathematics to establish the present
value of the favored issues. But the combination of precise formu-
las with highly imprecise assumptions can be used to establish, or
rather to justify, practically any value one wishes, however high,
for a really outstanding issue. But, paradoxically, that very fact on
close examination will be seen to imply that no one value, or rea-
sonably narrow range of values, can be counted on to establish and
maintain itself for a given growth company; hence at times the
market may conceivably value the growth component at a strik-
ingly low figure.
Returning to my distinction between the older and newer spec-
ulative elements in common stock, we might characterize them by
two outlandish but convenient words, viz.: endogenous and exoge-
nous. Let me illustrate briefly the old-time speculative common
stock, as distinguished from an investment stock, by some data
relating to American Can and Pennsylvania Railroad in 1911–1913.
(These appear in Benjamin Graham and David L. Dodd, Security
Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1940, pp. 2–3.)
In those three years the price range of “Pennsy” moved only
between 53 and 65, or between 12.2 and 15 times its average earn-
ings for the period. It showed steady profits, was paying a reliable
$3 dividend, and investors were sure that it was backed by well
over its par of $50 in tangible assets. By contrast, the price of Amer-
564 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 579 =====
ican Can ranged between 9 and 47; its earnings between 7 cents
and $8.86; the ratio of price to the three-year average earnings
moved between 1.9 times and 10 times; it paid no dividend at all;
and sophisticated investors were well aware that the $100 par
value of the common represented nothing but undisclosed
“water,” since the preferred issue exceeded the tangible assets
available for it. Thus American Can common was a representative
speculative issue, because American Can Company was then a
speculatively capitalized enterprise in a fluctuating and uncertain
industry. Actually, American Can had a far more brilliant long-
term future than Pennsylvania Railroad; but not only was this fact
not suspected by investors or speculators in those days, but even if
it had been it would probably have been put aside by the investors
as basically irrelevant to investment policies and programs in the
years 1911–1913.
Now, to expose you to the development through time of the
importance of long-term prospects for investments. I should like to
use as my example our most spectacular giant industrial enter-
prise—none other than International Business Machines, which
last year entered the small group of companies with $1 billion of
sales. May I introduce one or two autobiographical notes here, in
order to inject a little of the personal touch into what otherwise
would be an excursion into cold figures? In 1912 I had left college
for a term to take charge of a research project for U.S. Express Com-
pany. We set out to find the effect on revenues of a proposed revo-
lutionary new system of computing express rates. For this purpose
we used the so-called Hollerith machines, leased out by the then
Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company. They comprised card
punches, card sorters, and tabulators—tools almost unknown to
businessmen, then, and having their chief application in the Cen-
sus Bureau. I entered Wall Street in 1914, and the next year the
bonds and common stock of C.-T.-R. Company were listed on the
New York Stock Exchange. Well, I had a kind of sentimental inter-
est in that enterprise, and besides I considered myself a sort of
technological expert on their products, being one of the few finan-
cial people who had seen and used them. So early in 1916 I went to
the head of my firm, known as Mr. A. N., and pointed out to him
that C.-T.-R. stock was selling in the middle 40s (for 105,000
shares); that it had earned $6.50 in 1915; that its book value—
Appendixes 565

===== PDF PAGE 580 =====
including, to be sure, some nonsegregated intangibles—was $130;
that it had started a $3 dividend; and that I thought rather highly of
the company’s products and prospects. Mr. A. N. looked at me
pityingly. “Ben,” said he, “do not mention that company to me
again. I would not touch it with a ten-foot pole. [His favorite
expression.] Its 6 per cent bonds are selling in the low 80s and they
are no good. So how can the stock be any good? Everybody knows
there is nothing behind it but water.” (Glossary: In those days that
was the ultimate of condemnation. It meant that the asset account
of the balance sheet was fictitious. Many industrial companies—
notably U.S. Steel—despite their $100 par, represented nothing but
water, concealed in a written-up plant account. Since they had
“nothing” to back them but earning power and future prospects,
no self-respecting investor would give them a second thought.)
I returned to my statistician’s cubbyhole, a chastened young
man. Mr. A. N. was not only experienced and successful, but
extremely shrewd as well. So much was I impressed by his sweep-
ing condemnation of Computing-Tabulating-Recording that I
never bought a share of it in my life, not even after its name was
changed to International Business Machines in 1926.
Now let us take a look at the same company with its new name
in 1926, a year of pretty high stock markets. At that time it first
revealed the good-will item in its balance sheet, in the rather large
sum of $13.6 million. A. N. had been right. Practically every dollar
of the so-called equity behind the common in 1915 had been noth-
ing but water. However, since that time the company had made an
impressive record under the direction of T. L. Watson, Sr. Its net
had risen from $691,000 to $3.7 million—over fivefold—a greater
percentage gain than it was to make in any subsequent eleven-year
period. It had built up a nice tangible equity for the common, and
had split it 3.6 for one. It had established a $3 dividend rate for the
new stock, while earnings were $6.39 thereon. You might have
expected the 1926 stock market to have been pretty enthusiastic
about a company with such a growth history and so strong a trade
position. Let us see. The price range for that year was 31 low, 59
high. At the average of 45 it was selling at the same 7-times multi-
plier of earnings and the same 6.7 per cent dividend yield as it had
done in 1915. At its low of 31 it was not far in excess of its tangible
book value, and in that respect was far more conservatively priced
than eleven years earlier.
566 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 581 =====
These data illustrate, as well as any can, the persistence of the
old-time investment viewpoint until the culminating years of the
bull market of the 1920s. What has happened since then can be
summarized by using ten-year intervals in the history of IBM. In
1936 net expanded to twice the 1926 figures, and the average multi-
plier rose from 7 to 17 1⁄2. From 1936 to 1946 the gain was 2 1⁄2 times,
but the average multiplier in 1946 remained at 17 1⁄2. Then the pace
accelerated. The 1956 net was nearly 4 times that of 1946, and the
average multiplier rose to 321⁄2. Last year, with a further gain in net,
the multiplier rose again to an average of 42, if we do not count the
unconsolidated equity in the foreign subsidiary.
When we examine these recent price figures with care we see
some interesting analogies and contrasts with those of forty years
earlier. The one-time scandalous water, so prevalent in the balance
sheets of industrial companies, has all been squeezed out—first by
disclosure and then by writeoffs. But a different kind of water has
been put back into the valuation by the stock market—by investors
and speculators themselves. When IBM now sells at 7 times its
book value, instead of 7 times earnings, the effect is practically the
same as if it had no book value at all. Or the small book-value por-
tion can be considered as a sort of minor preferred-stock compo-
nent of the price, the rest representing exactly the same sort of
commitment as the old-time speculator made when he bought
Woolworth or U.S. Steel common entirely for their earning power
and future prospects.
It is worth remarking, in passing, that in the thirty years which
saw IBM transformed from a 7-times earnings to a 40-times earn-
ings enterprise, many of what I have called the endogenous specu-
lative aspects of our large industrial companies have tended to
disappear, or at least to diminish greatly. Their financial positions
are firm, their capital structures conservative: they are managed far
more expertly, and even more honestly, than before. Furthermore,
the requirements of complete disclosure have removed one of the
important speculative elements of years ago—that derived from
ignorance and mystery.
Another personal digression here. In my early years in the Street
one of the favorite mystery stocks was Consolidated Gas of New
York, now Consolidated Edison. It owned as a subsidiary the prof-
itable New York Edison Company, but it reported only dividends
received from this source, not its full earnings. The unreported Edi-
Appendixes 567

===== PDF PAGE 582 =====
son earnings supplied the mystery and the “hidden value.” To my
surprise I discovered that these hush-hush figures were actually on
file each year with the Public Service Commission of the state. It
was a simple matter to consult the records and to present the true
earnings of Consolidated Gas in a magazine article. (Incidentally,
the addition to profits was not spectacular.) One of my older
friends said to me then: “Ben, you may think you are a great guy to
supply those missing figures, but Wall Street is going to thank you
for nothing. Consolidated Gas with the mystery is both more inter-
esting and more valuable than ex-mystery. You youngsters who
want to stick your noses into everything are going to ruin Wall
Street.”
It is true that the three M’s which then supplied so much fuel to
the speculative fires have now all but disappeared. These were
Mystery, Manipulation, and (thin) Margins. But we security ana-
lysts have ourselves been creating valuation approaches which are
so speculative in themselves as to pretty well take the place of
those older speculative factors. Do we not have our own “3M’s”
now—none other than Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing
Company—and does not this common stock illustrate perfectly the
new speculation as contrasted with the old? Consider a few fig-
ures. When M. M. & M. common sold at 101 last year the market
was valuing it at 44 times 1956 earnings, which happened to show
no increase to speak of in 1957. The enterprise itself was valued at
$1.7 billion, of which $200 million was covered by net assets, and a
cool $11⁄2 billion represented the market’s appraisal of “good will.”
We do not know the process of calculation by which that valuation
of good will was arrived at; we do know that a few months later
the market revised this appraisal downward by some $450 million,
or about 30 per cent. Obviously it is impossible to calculate accu-
rately the intangible component of a splendid company such as
this. It follows as a kind of mathematical law that the more impor-
tant the good will or future earning-power factor the more uncer-
tain becomes the true value of the enterprise, and therefore the
more speculative inherently the common stock.
It may be well to recognize a vital difference that has developed
in the valuation of these intangible factors, when we compare ear-
lier times with today. A generation or more ago it was the standard
rule, recognized both in average stock prices and in formal or legal
568 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 583 =====
valuations, that intangibles were to be appraised on a more conser-
vative basis than tangibles. A good industrial company might be
required to earn between 6 per cent and 8 per cent on its tangible
assets, represented typically by bonds and preferred stock; but its
excess earnings, or the intangible assets they gave rise to, would be
valued on, say, a 15 per cent basis. (You will find approximately
these ratios in the initial offering of Woolworth preferred and com-
mon stock in 1911, and in numerous others.) But what has hap-
pened since the 1920s? Essentially the exact reverse of these
relationships may now be seen. A company must now typically
earn about 10 per cent on its common equity to have it sell in the
average market at full book value. But its excess earnings, above 10
per cent on capital, are usually valued more liberally, or at a higher
multiplier, than the base earnings required to support the book
value in the market. Thus a company earning 15 per cent on the
equity may well sell at 13 1⁄2 times earnings, or twice its net assets.
This would mean that the first 10 per cent earned on capital is val-
ued at only 10 times, but the next 5 per cent—what used to be
called the “excess”—is actually valued at 20 times.
Now there is a logical reason for this reversal in valuation proce-
dure, which is related to the newer emphasis on growth expecta-
tions. Companies that earn a high return on capital are given these
liberal appraisals not only because of the good profitability itself,
and the relative stability associated with it, but perhaps even more
cogently because high earnings on capital generally go hand in
hand with a good growth record and prospects. Thus what is really
paid for nowadays in the case of highly profitable companies is not
the good will in the old and restricted sense of an established name
and a profitable business, but rather their assumed superior expec-
tations of increased profits in the future.
This brings me to one or two additional mathematical aspects of
the new attitude toward common-stock valuations, which I shall
touch on merely in the form of brief suggestions. If, as many tests
show, the earnings multiplier tends to increase with profitability—
i.e., as the rate of return on book value increases—then the arith-
metical consequence of this feature is that value tends to increase
directly as the square of the earnings, but inversely the book value.
Thus in an important and very real sense tangible assets have
become a drag on average market value rather than a source
Appendixes 569

===== PDF PAGE 584 =====
thereof. Take a far from extreme illustration. If Company A earns $4
a share on a $20 book value, and Company B also $4 a share on
$100 book value, Company A is almost certain to sell at a higher
multiplier, and hence at higher price than Company B—say $60 for
Company A shares and $35 for Company B shares. Thus it would
not be inexact to declare that the $80 per share of greater assets for
Company B are responsible for the $25 per share lower market
price, since the earnings per share are assumed to be equal.
But more important than the foregoing is the general relation-
ship between mathematics and the new approach to stock values.
Given the three ingredients of (a) optimistic assumptions as to the
rate of earnings growth, (b) a sufficiently long projection of this
growth into the future, and (c) the miraculous workings of com-
pound interest—lo! the security analyst is supplied with a new
kind of philosopher’s stone which can produce or justify any
desired valuation for a really “good stock.” I have commented in a
recent article in the Analysts’ Journal on the vogue of higher mathe-
matics in bull markets, and quoted David Durand’s exposition of
the striking analogy between value calculations of growth stocks
and the famous Petersburg Paradox, which has challenged and
confused mathematicians for more than two hundred years. The
point I want to make here is that there is a special paradox in the
relationship between mathematics and investment attitudes on
common stocks, which is this: Mathematics is ordinarily consid-
ered as producing precise and dependable results; but in the stock
market the more elaborate and abstruse the mathematics the more
uncertain and speculative are the conclusions we draw therefrom.
In forty-four years of Wall Street experience and study I have never
seen dependable calculations made about common-stock values, or
related investment policies, that went beyond simple arithmetic or
the most elementary algebra. Whenever calculus is brought in, 
or higher algebra, you could take it as a warning signal that the
operator was trying to substitute theory for experience, and usu-
ally also to give to speculation the deceptive guise of investment.
The older ideas of common-stock investment may seem quite
naïve to the sophisticated security analyst of today. The great
emphasis was always on what we now call the defensive aspects of
the company or issue—mainly the assurance that it would con-
tinue its dividend unreduced in bad times. Thus the strong rail-
570 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 585 =====
roads, which constituted the standard investment commons of fifty
years ago, were actually regarded in very much the same way as
the public-utility commons in recent years. If the past record indi-
cated stability, the chief requirement was met; not too much effort
was made to anticipate adverse changes of an underlying character
in the future. But, conversely, especially favorable future prospects
were regarded by shrewd investors as something to look for but
not to pay for.
In effect this meant that the investor did not have to pay any-
thing substantial for superior long-term prospects. He got these,
virtually without extra cost, as a reward for his own superior intel-
ligence and judgment in picking the best rather than the merely
good companies. For common stocks with the same financial
strength, past earnings record, and dividend stability all sold at
about the same dividend yield.
This was indeed a shortsighted point of view, but it had the
great advantage of making common-stock investment in the old
days not only simple but also basically sound and highly prof-
itable. Let me return for the last time to a personal note. Some-
where around 1920 our firm distributed a series of little pamphlets
entitled Lessons for Investors. Of course it took a brash analyst in his
middle twenties like myself to hit on so smug and presumptuous a
title. But in one of the papers I made the casual statement that “if a
common stock is a good investment it is also a good speculation.”
For, reasoned I, if a common stock was so sound that it carried very
little risk of loss it must ordinarily be so good as to possess excel-
lent chances for future gains. Now this was a perfectly true and
even valuable discovery, but it was true only because nobody paid
any attention to it. Some years later, when the public woke up to
the historical merits of common stocks as long-term investments,
they soon ceased to have any such merit, because the public’s
enthusiasm created price levels which deprived them of their built-
in margin of safety, and thus drove them out of the investment
class. Then, of course, the pendulum swung to the other extreme,
and we soon saw one of the most respected authorities declaring
(in 1931) that no common stock could ever be an investment.
When we view this long-range experience in perspective we
find another set of paradoxes in the investor’s changing attitude
toward capital gains as contrasted with income. It seems a truism
Appendixes 571

===== PDF PAGE 586 =====
to say that the old-time common-stock investor was not much
interested in capital gains. He bought almost entirely for safety and
income, and let the speculator concern himself with price apprecia-
tion. Today we are likely to say that the more experienced and
shrewd the investor, the less attention he pays to dividend returns,
and the more heavily his interest centers on long-term apprecia-
tion. Yet one might argue, perversely, that precisely because the
old-time investor did not concentrate on future capital apprecia-
tion he was virtually guaranteeing to himself that he would have it,
at least in the field of industrial stocks. And, conversely, today’s
investor is so concerned with anticipating the future that he is
already paying handsomely for it in advance. Thus what he has
projected with so much study and care may actually happen and
still not bring him any profit. If it should fail to materialize to the
degree expected he may in fact be faced with a serious temporary
and perhaps even permanent loss.
What lessons—again using the pretentious title of my 1920 pam-
phlet—can the analyst of 1958 learn from this linking of past with
current attitudes? Not much of value, one is inclined to say. We can
look back nostalgically to the good old days when we paid only for
the present and could get the future for nothing—an “all this and
Heaven too” combination. Shaking our heads sadly we mutter,
“Those days are gone forever.” Have not investors and security
analysts eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and evil prospects?
By so doing have they not permanently expelled themselves from
that Eden where promising common stocks at reasonable prices
could be plucked off the bushes? Are we doomed always to run the
risk either of paying unreasonably high prices for good quality and
prospects, or of getting poor quality and prospects when we pay
what seems a reasonable price?
It certainly looks that way. Yet one cannot be sure even of that
pessimistic dilemma. Recently, I did a little research in the long-
term history of that towering enterprise, General Electric—stimu-
lated by the arresting chart of fifty-nine years of earnings and
dividends appearing in their recently published 1957 Report. These
figures are not without their surprises for the knowledgeable ana-
lyst. For one thing they show that prior to 1947 the growth of G. E.
was fairly modest and quite irregular. The 1946 earnings, per share
adjusted, were only 30 per cent higher than in 1902—52 cents ver-
572 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 587 =====
sus 40 cents—and in no year of this period were the 1902 earnings
as much as doubled. Yet the price-earnings ratio rose from 9 times
in 1910 and 1916 to 29 times in 1936 and again in 1946. One might
say, of course, that the 1946 multiplier at least showed the well-
known prescience of shrewd investors. We analysts were able to
foresee then the really brilliant period of growth that was looming
ahead in the next decade. Maybe so. But some of you remember
that the next year, 1947, which established an impressive new high
for G.E.’s per-share earnings, was marked also by an extraordinary
fall in the price-earnings ratio. At its low of 32 (before the 3-for-1
split) G.E. actually sold again at only 9 times its current earnings
and its average price for the year was only about 10 times earnings.
Our crystal ball certainly clouded over in the short space of twelve
months.
This striking reversal took place only eleven years ago. It casts
some little doubt in my mind as to the complete dependability of
the popular belief among analysts that prominent and promising
companies will now always sell at high price-earnings ratios—that
this is a fundamental fact of life for investors and they may as well
accept and like it. I have no desire at all to be dogmatic on this
point. All I can say is that it is not settled in my mind, and each of
you must seek to settle it for yourself.
But in my concluding remarks I can say something definite
about the structure of the market for various types of common
stocks, in terms of their investment and speculative characteristics.
In the old days the investment character of a common stock was
more or less the same as, or proportionate with, that of the enter-
prise itself, as measured quite well by its credit rating. The lower
the yield on its bonds or preferred, the more likely was the com-
mon to meet all the criteria for a satisfactory investment, and the
smaller the element of speculation involved in its purchase. This
relationship, between the speculative ranking of the common and
the investment rating of the company, could be graphically
expressed pretty much as a straight line descending from left to
right. But nowadays I would describe the graph as U-shaped. At
the left, where the company itself is speculative and its credit low,
the common stock is of course highly speculative, just as it has
always been in the past. At the right extremity, however, where the
company has the highest credit rating because both its past record
Appendixes 573

===== PDF PAGE 588 =====
and future prospects are most impressive, we find that the stock
market tends more or less continuously to introduce a highly spec-
ulative element into the common shares through the simple means
of a price so high as to carry a fair degree of risk.
At this point I cannot forbear introducing a surprisingly rele-
vant, if quite exaggerated, quotation on the subject which I found
recently in one of Shakespeare’s sonnets. It reads:
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favor
Lose all and more by paying too much rent?
Returning to my imaginary graph, it would be the center area
where the speculative element in common-stock purchases would
tend to reach its minimum. In this area we could find many well-
established and strong companies, with a record of past growth
corresponding to that of the national economy and with future
prospects apparently of the same character. Such common stocks
could be bought at most times, except in the upper ranges of a bull
market, at moderate prices in relation to their indicated intrinsic
values. As a matter of fact, because of the present tendency of
investors and speculators alike to concentrate on more glamorous
issues, I should hazard the statement that these middle-ground
stocks tend to sell on the whole rather below their independently
determinable values. They thus have a margin-of-safety factor sup-
plied by the same market preferences and prejudices which tend to
destroy the margin of safety in the more promising issues. Further-
more, in this wide array of companies there is plenty of room for
penetrating analysis of the past record and for discriminating
choice in the area of future prospects, to which can be added the
higher assurance of safety conferred by diversification.
When Phaëthon insisted on driving the chariot of the Sun, his
father, the experienced operator, gave the neophyte some advice
which the latter failed to follow—to his cost. Ovid summed up
Phoebus Apollo’s counsel in three words:
Medius tutissimus ibis
You will go safest in the middle course
I think this principle holds good for investors and their security
analyst advisers.
574 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 589 =====
5. A Case History: Aetna Maintenance Co.
The first part of this history is reproduced from our 1965 edition,
where it appeared under the title “A Horrible Example.” The sec-
ond part summarizes the later metamorphosis of the enterprise.
We think it might have a salutary effect on our readers’ future
attitude toward new common-stock offerings if we cited one “hor-
rible example” here in some detail. It is taken from the first page of
Standard & Poor’s Stock Guide, and illustrates in extreme fashion
the glaring weaknesses of the 1960–1962 flotations, the extraordi-
nary overvaluations given them in the market, and the subsequent
collapse.
In November 1961, 154,000 shares of Aetna Maintenance Co.
common were sold to public at $9 and the price promptly
advanced to $15. Before the financing the net assets per share were
about $1.20, but they were increased to slightly over $3 per share
by the money received for the new shares.
The sales and earnings prior to the financing were:
The corresponding figures after the financing were:
June 1963 $4,681,000 $ 42,000 (def.) $0.11 (def.)
June 1962 4,234,000 149,000 0.36
In 1962 the price fell to 22⁄3, and in 1964 it sold as low as 7⁄8. No divi-
dends were paid during this period.
COMMENT: This was much too small a business for public partic-
ipation. The stock was sold—and bought—on the basis of one good
year; the results previously had been derisory. There was nothing in
Appendixes 575
Year Ended Sales Net for Earned
Common Per Share
June 1961 $3,615,000 $187,000 $0.69
(June 1960)* (1,527,000) (25,000) (0.09)
December 1959 2,215,000 48,000 0.17
December 1958 1,389,000 16,000 0.06
December 1957 1,083,000 21,000 0.07
December 1956 1,003,000 2,000 0.01
* For six months.

===== PDF PAGE 590 =====
the nature of this highly competitive business to insure future sta-
bility. At the high price soon after issuance the heedless public was
paying much more per dollar of earnings and assets than for most
of our large and strong companies. This example is admittedly
extreme, but it is far from unique; the instances of lesser, but inex-
cusable, overvaluations run into the hundreds.
Sequel 1965–1970
In 1965 new interests came into the company. The unprofitable
building-maintenance business was sold out, and the company em-
barked in an entirely different venture: making electronic devices.
The name was changed to Haydon Switch and Instrument Co. The
earnings results have not been impressive. In the five years
1965–1969 the enterprise showed average earnings of only 8 cents
per share of “old stock,” with 34 cents earned in the best year, 1967.
However, in true modern style, the company split the stock 2 for 1 in
1968. The market price also ran true to Wall Street form. It advanced
from 7⁄8 in 1964 to the equivalent of 161⁄2 in 1968 (after the split). The
price now exceeded the record set in the enthusiastic days of 1961.
This time the overvaluation was much worse than before. The stock
was now selling at 52 times the earnings of its only good year, and
some 200 times its average earnings. Also, the company was again to
report a deficit in the very year that the new high price was estab-
lished. The next year, 1969, the bid price fell to $1.
QUESTIONS: Did the idiots who paid $8+ for this stock in 1968
know anything at all about the company’s previous history, its
five-year earnings record, its asset value (very small)? Did they
have any idea of how much—or rather how little—they were get-
ting for their money? Did they care? Has anyone on Wall Street any
responsibility at all for the regular recurrence of completely brain-
less, shockingly widespread, and inevitable catastrophic specula-
tion in this kind of vehicle?
6. Tax Accounting for NVF’s Acquisition of Sharon 
Steel Shares
1. NVF acquired 88% of Sharon stock in 1969, paying for each
share $70 in NVF 5% bonds, due 1994, and warrants to buy 1 1⁄2
576 Appendixes

===== PDF PAGE 591 =====
shares of NVF at $22 per share. The initial market value of the
bonds appears to have been only 43% of par, while the warrants
were quoted at $10 per NVF share involved. This meant that the
Sharon holders got only $30 worth of bonds but $15 worth of war-
rants for each share turned in, a total of $45 per share. (This was
about the average price of Sharon in 1968, and also its closing price
for the year.) The book value of Sharon was $60 per share. The dif-
ference between this book value and the market value of Sharon
stock amounted to about $21 million on the 1,415,000 shares of
Sharon acquired.
2. The accounting treatment was designed to accomplish three
things: (a) To treat the issuance of the bonds as equivalent to a
“sale” thereof at 43, giving the company an annual deduction from
income for amortization of the huge bond discount of $54 million.
(Actually it would be charging itself about 15% annual interest on
the “proceeds” of the $99 million debenture issue.) (b) To offset this
bond-discount charge by an approximately equal “profit,” consist-
ing of a credit to income of one-tenth of the difference between the
cost price of 45 for the Sharon stock and its book value of 60. (This
would correspond, in reverse fashion, to the required practice of
charging income each year with a part of the price paid for acquisi-
tions in excess of the book value of the assets acquired.) (c) The
beauty of this arrangement would be that the company could save
initially about $900,000 a year, or $1 per share, in income taxes from
these two annual entries, because the amortization of bond dis-
count could be deducted from taxable income but the amortization
of “excess of equity over cost” did not have to be included in tax-
able income.
3. This accounting treatment is reflected in both the consoli-
dated income account and the consolidated balance sheet of NVF
for 1969, and pro forma for 1968. Since a good part of the cost of
Sharon stock was to be treated as paid for by warrants, it was nec-
essary to show the initial market value of the warrants as part of
the common-stock capital figure. Thus in this case, as in no other
that we know, the warrants were assigned a substantial value in
the balance sheet, namely $22 million+ (but only in an explanatory
note).
Appendixes 577

===== PDF PAGE 592 =====
7. Technological Companies as Investments
In the Standard & Poor’s services in mid-1971 there were listed
about 200 companies with names beginning with Compu-, Data,
Electro-, Scien-, Techno-. About half of these belonged to some part
of the computer industry. All of them were traded in the market or
had made applications to sell stock to the public.
A total of 46 such companies appeared in the S & P Stock Guide
for September 1971. Of these, 26 were reporting deficits, only six
were earning over $1 per share, and only five were paying divi-
dends.
In the December 1968 Stock Guide there had appeared 45 compa-
nies with similar technological names. Tracing the sequel of this
list, as shown in the September 1971 Guide, we find the following
developments:
COMMENT: It is virtually certain that the many technological
companies not included in the Guide in 1968 had a poorer subse-
quent record than those that were included; also that the 12 compa-
nies dropped from the list did worse than those that were retained.
The harrowing results shown by these samples are no doubt rea-
sonably indicative of the quality and price history of the entire
group of “technology” issues. The phenomenal success of IBM and
a few other companies was bound to produce a spate of public
offerings of new issues in their fields, for which large losses were
virtually guaranteed.
578 Appendixes
Total Price Price Declined Price Declined Dropped from
Companies Advanced Less Than Half More Than Half Stock Guide
45 2 8 23 12

===== PDF PAGE 593 =====
Endnotes
Introduction: What This Book Expects to Accomplish
1. “Letter stock” is stock not registered for sale with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), and for which the buyer supplies a let-
ter stating the purchase was for investment.
2. The foregoing are Moody’s figures for AAA bonds and industrial
stocks.
Chapter 1. Investment versus Speculation: 
Results to Be Expected by the Intelligent Investor
1. Benjamin Graham, David L. Dodd, Sidney Cottle, and Charles
Tatham, McGraw-Hill, 4th. ed., 1962. A fascimile copy of the 1934 edi-
tion of Security Analysis was reissued in 1996 (McGraw-Hill).
2. This is quoted from Investment and Speculation, by Lawrence Cham-
berlain, published in 1931.
3. In a survey made by the Federal Reserve Board.
4. 1965 edition, p. 8.
5. We assume here a top tax bracket for the typical investor of 40%
applicable to dividends and 20% applicable to capital gains.
Chapter 2. The Investor and Inflation
1. This was written before President Nixon’s price-and-wage “freeze” in
August 1971, followed by his “Phase 2” system of controls. These
important developments would appear to confirm the views
expressed above.
2. The rate earned on the Standard & Poor’s index of 425 industrial
stocks was about 11 1⁄2% on asset value—due in part to the inclusion 
of the large and highly profitable IBM, which is not one of the DJIA
30 issues.
579

===== PDF PAGE 594 =====
3. A chart issued by American Telephone & Telegraph in 1971 indi-
cates that the rates charged for residential telephone services
were somewhat less in 1970 than in 1960.
4. Reported in the Wall Street Journal, October, 1970.
Chapter 3. A Century of Stock-Market History: 
The Level of Stock Prices in Early 1972
1. Both Standard & Poor’s and Dow Jones have separate averages for
public utilities and transportation (chiefly railroad) companies. Since
1965 the New York Stock Exchange has computed an index represent-
ing the movement of all its listed common shares.
2. Made by the Center for Research in Security Prices of the University
of Chicago, under a grant from the Charles E. Merrill Foundation.
3. This was first written in early 1971 with the DJIA at 940. The contrary
view held generally on Wall Street was exemplified in a detailed
study which reached a median valuation of 1520 for the DJIA in 1975.
This would correspond to a discounted value of, say, 1200 in mid-
1971. In March 1972 the DJIA was again at 940 after an intervening
decline to 798. Again, Graham was right. The “detailed study” he men-
tions was too optimistic by an entire decade: The Dow Jones Industrial
Average did not close above 1520 until December 13, 1985!
Chapter 4. General Portfolio Policy: The Defensive Investor
1. A higher tax-free yield, with sufficient safety, can be obtained from
certain Industrial Revenue Bonds, a relative newcomer among financial
inventions. They would be of interest particularly to the enterprising
investor.
Chapter 5. The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks
1. Practical Formulas for Successful Investing, Wilfred Funk, Inc., 1953.
2. In current mathematical approaches to investment decisions, it has be-
come standard practice to define “risk” in terms of average price varia-
tions or “volatility.” See, for example, An Introduction to Risk and Return,
by Richard A. Brealey, The M.I.T. Press, 1969. We find this use of the
word “risk” more harmful than useful for sound investment deci-
sions—because it places too much emphasis on market fluctuations.
3. All 30 companies in the DJIA met this standard in 1971.
580 Endnotes

===== PDF PAGE 595 =====
Chapter 6. Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor:
Negative Approach
1. In 1970 the Milwaukee road reported a large deficit. It suspended
interest payments on its income bonds, and the price of the 5% issue
fell to 10.
2. For example: Cities Service $6 first preferred, not paying dividends,
sold at as low as 15 in 1937 and at 27 in 1943, when the accumulations
had reached $60 per share. In 1947 it was retired by exchange for
$196.50 of 3% debentures for each share, and it sold as high as 186.
3. An elaborate statistical study carried on under the direction of the
National Bureau of Economic Research indicates that such has actu-
ally been the case. Graham is referring to W. Braddock Hickman, 
Corporate Bond Quality and Investor Experience (Princeton University
Press, 1958). Hickman’s book later inspired Michael Milken of Drexel
Burnham Lambert to offer massive high-yield financing to companies
with less than sterling credit ratings, helping to ignite the leveraged-
buyout and hostile takeover craze of the late 1980s.
4. A representative sample of 41 such issues taken from Standard &
Poor’s Stock Guide shows that five lost 90% or more of their high
price, 30 lost more than half, and the entire group about two-thirds.
The many not listed in the Stock Guide undoubtedly had a larger
shrinkage on the whole.
Chapter 7. Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: 
The Positive Side
1. See, for example, Lucile Tomlinson, Practical Formulas for Successful
Investing; and Sidney Cottle and W. T. Whitman, Investment Timing:
The Formula Approach, both published in 1953.
2. A company with an ordinary record cannot, without confusing the
term, be called a growth company or a “growth stock” merely
because its proponent expects it to do better than the average in the
future. It is just a “promising company.” Graham is making a subtle but
important point: If the definition of a growth stock is a company that will
thrive in the future, then that’s not a definition at all, but wishful thinking.
It’s like calling a sports team “the champions” before the season is over.
This wishful thinking persists today; among mutual funds, “growth” port-
folios describe their holdings as companies with “above-average growth
Endnotes 581

===== PDF PAGE 596 =====
potential” or “favorable prospects for earnings growth. ” A better defini-
tion might be companies whose net earnings per share have increased
by an annual average of at least 15% for at least five years running.
(Meeting this definition in the past does not ensure that a company will
meet it in the future.)
3. See Table 7-1.
4. Here are two age-old Wall Street proverbs that counsel such sales:
“No tree grows to Heaven” and “A bull may make money, a bear may
make money, but a hog never makes money.”
5. Two studies are available. The first, made by H. G. Schneider, one of
our students, covers the years 1917–1950 and was published in June
1951 in the Journal of Finance. The second was made by Drexel Fire-
stone, members of the New York Stock Exchange, and covers the
years 1933–1969. The data are given here by their kind permission.
6. See pp. 393–395, for three examples of special situations existing in
1971.
Chapter 8. The Investor and Market Fluctuations
1. Except, perhaps, in dollar-cost averaging plans begun at a reasonable
price level.
2. But according to Robert M. Ross, authority on the Dow theory, the
last two buy signals, shown in December 1966 and December 1970,
were well below the preceding selling points.
3. The top three ratings for bonds and preferred stocks are Aaa, Aa, and
A, used by Moody’s, and AAA, AA, A by Standard & Poor’s. There
are others, going down to D.
4. This idea has already had some adoptions in Europe—e.g., by the
state-owned Italian electric-energy concern on its “guaranteed float-
ing rate loan notes,” due 1980. In June 1971 it advertised in New York
that the annual rate of interest paid thereon for the next six months
would be 81⁄8%.
One such flexible arrangement was incorporated in The Toronto-
Dominion Bank’s “7%–8% debentures,” due 1991, offered in June
1971. The bonds pay 7% to July 1976 and 8% thereafter, but the holder
has the option to receive his principal in July 1976.
582 Endnotes

===== PDF PAGE 597 =====
Chapter 9. Investing in Investment Funds
1. The sales charge is universally stated as a percentage of the selling
price, which includes the charge, making it appear lower than if
applied to net asset value. We consider this a sales gimmick unwor-
thy of this respectable industry.
2. The Money Managers, by G. E. Kaplan and C. Welles, Random House,
1969.
3. See definition of “letter stock” on p. 579.
4. Title of a book first published in 1852. The volume described the
“South Sea Bubble,” the tulip mania, and other speculative binges of
the past. It was reprinted by Bernard M. Baruch, perhaps the only
continuously successful speculator of recent times, in 1932. Comment:
That was locking the stable door after the horse was stolen. Charles
Mackay’s Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds
(Metro Books, New York, 2002) was first published in 1841. Neither a
light read nor always strictly accurate, it is an extensive look at how 
large numbers of people often believe very silly things—for instance, that
iron can be transmuted into gold, that demons most often show up on
Friday evenings, and that it is possible to get rich quick in the stock 
market. For a more factual account, consult Edward Chancellor’s Devil
Take the Hindmost (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, New York, 1999); for a
lighter take, try Robert Menschel’s Markets, Mobs, and Mayhem: A 
Modern Look at the Madness of Crowds (John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, 2002).
Chapter 10. The Investor and His Advisers
1. The examinations are given by the Institute of Chartered Financial
Analysts, which is an arm of the Financial Analysts Federation. The
latter now embraces constituent societies with over 50,000 members.
2. The NYSE had imposed some drastic rules of valuation (known as
“haircuts”) designed to minimize this danger, but apparently they
did not help sufficiently.
3. New offerings may now be sold only by means of a prospectus pre-
pared under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
This document must disclose all the pertinent facts about the issue
and issuer, and it is fully adequate to inform the prudent investor as to
the exact nature of the security offered him. But the very copiousness
Endnotes 583

===== PDF PAGE 598 =====
of the data required usually makes the prospectus of prohibitive
length. It is generally agreed that only a small percentage of individu-
als buying new issues read the prospectus with thoroughness. Thus
they are still acting mainly not on their own judgment but on that of
the house selling them the security or on the recommendation of the
individual salesman or account executive.
Chapter 11. Security Analysis for the Lay Investor: 
General Approach
1. Our textbook, Security Analysis by Benjamin Graham, David L. Dodd,
Sidney Cottle, and Charles Tatham (McGraw-Hill, 4th ed., 1962),
retains the title originally chosen in 1934, but it covers much of the
scope of financial analysis.
2. With Charles McGolrick, Harper & Row, 1964, reissued by Harper-
Business, 1998.
3. These figures are from Salomon Bros., a large New York bond house.
4. At least not by the great body of security analysts and investors.
Exceptional analysts, who can tell in advance what companies are
likely to deserve intensive study and have the facilities and capability
to make it, may have continued success with this work. For details of
such an approach see Philip Fisher, Common Stocks and Uncommon
Profits, Harper & Row, 1960.
5. On p. 295 we set forth a formula relating multipliers to the rate of
expected growth.
6. Part of the fireworks in the price of Chrysler was undoubtedly
inspired by two two-for-one stock splits taking place in the single
year 1963—an unprecedented phenomenon for a major company. In
the early 1980s, under Lee Iacocca, Chrysler did a three-peat, coming
back from the brink of bankruptcy to become one of the best-performing
stocks in America. However, identifying managers who can lead great
corporate comebacks is not as easy as it seems. When Al Dunlap took
over Sunbeam Corp. in 1996 after restructuring Scott Paper Co. (and
driving its stock price up 225% in 18 months), Wall Street hailed him as
little short of the Second Coming. Dunlap turned out to be a sham who
used improper accounting and false financial statements to mislead
Sunbeam’s investors—including the revered money managers Michael
Price and Michael Steinhardt, who had hired him. For a keen dissection
of Dunlap’s career, see John A. Byrne, Chainsaw (HarperCollins, New
York, 1999).
584 Endnotes

===== PDF PAGE 599 =====
7. Note that we do not suggest that this formula gives the “true value”
of a growth stock, but only that it approximates the results of the
more elaborate calculations in vogue.
Chapter 12. Things to Consider About Per-Share Earnings
1. Our recommended method of dealing with the warrant dilution is
discussed below. We prefer to consider the market value of the war-
rants as an addition to the current market price of the common stock
as a whole.
Chapter 13. A Comparison of Four Listed Companies
1. In March 1972, Emery sold at 64 times its 1971 earnings!
Chapter 14. Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor
1. Because of numerous stock splits, etc., through the years, the actual
average price of the DJIA list was about $53 per share in early 1972.
2. In 1960 only two of the 29 industrial companies failed to show current
assets equal to twice current liabilities, and only two failed to have
net current assets exceeding their debt. By December 1970 the num-
ber in each category had grown from two to twelve.
3. But note that their combined market action from December 1970 to
early 1972 was poorer than that of the DJIA. This demonstrates once
again that no system or formula will guarantee superior market
results. Our requirements “guarantee” only that the portfolio-buyer is
getting his money’s worth.
4. As a consequence we must exclude the majority of gas pipeline
stocks, since these enterprises are heavily bonded. The justification
for this setup is the underlying structure of purchase contracts which
“guarantee” bond payments; but the considerations here may be too
complicated for the needs of a defensive investor.
Chapter 15. Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor
1. Mutual Funds and Other Institutional Investors: A New Perspective,
I. Friend, M. Blume, and J. Crockett, McGraw-Hill, 1970. We should
add that the 1966–1970 results of many of the funds we studied were
Endnotes 585

===== PDF PAGE 600 =====
somewhat better than those of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock com-
posite and considerably better than those of the DJIA.
2. Personal note: Many years before the stock-market pyrotechnics in
that particular company the author was its “financial vice-president”
at the princely salary of $3,000 per annum. It was then really in the
fireworks business. In early 1929, Graham became a financial vice pres-
ident of Unexcelled Manufacturing Co., the nation’s largest producer of
fireworks. Unexcelled later became a diversified chemical company and
no longer exists in independent form.
3. The Guide does not show multipliers above 99. Most such would be
mathematical oddities, caused by earnings just above the zero point.
Chapter 16. Convertible Issues and Warrants
1. This point is well illustrated by an offering of two issues of Ford
Motor Finance Co. made simultaneously in November 1971. One was
a 20-year nonconvertible bond, yielding 71⁄2%. The other was a 25-year
bond, subordinated to the first in order of claim and yielding only
41⁄2%; but it was made convertible into Ford Motor stock, against its
then price of 68 1⁄2. To obtain the conversion privilege the buyer gave
up 40% of income and accepted a junior-creditor position.
2. Note that in late 1971 Studebaker-Worthington common sold as low
as 38 while the $5 preferred sold at or about 77. The spread had thus
grown from 2 to 20 points during the year, illustrating once more the
desirability of such switches and also the tendency of the stock mar-
ket to neglect arithmetic. (Incidentally the small premium of the pre-
ferred over the common in December 1970 had already been made up
by its higher dividend.)
Chapter 17. Four Extremely Instructive Case Histories
1. See, for example, the article “Six Flags at Half Mast,” by Dr. A. J.
Briloff, in Barron’s, January 11, 1971.
Chapter 18. A Comparison of Eight Pairs of Companies
1. The reader will recall from p. 434 above that AAA Enterprises tried to
enter this business, but quickly failed. Here Graham is making a pro-
586 Endnotes

===== PDF PAGE 601 =====
found and paradoxical observation: The more money a company makes,
the more likely it is to face new competition, since its high returns signal
so clearly that easy money is to be had. The new competition, in turn, will
lead to lower prices and smaller profits. This crucial point was over-
looked by overenthusiastic Internet stock buyers, who believed that early
winners would sustain their advantage indefinitely.
Chapter 19. Shareholders and Managements: Dividend Policy
1. Analytical studies have shown that in the typical case a dollar paid
out in dividends had as much as four times the positive effect on mar-
ket price as had a dollar of undistributed earnings. This point was
well illustrated by the public-utility group for a number of years
before 1950. The low-payout issues sold at low multipliers of earn-
ings, and proved to be especially attractive buys because their divi-
dends were later advanced. Since 1950 payout rates have been much
more uniform for the industry.
Chapter 20. “Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept 
of Investment
1. This argument is supported by Paul Hallingby, Jr., “Speculative
Opportunities in Stock-Purchase Warrants,” Analysts’ Journal, third
quarter 1947.
Postscript
1. Veracity requires the admission that the deal almost fell through
because the partners wanted assurance that the purchase price would
be 100% covered by asset value. A future $300 million or more in mar-
ket gain turned on, say, $50,000 of accounting items. By dumb luck
they got what they insisted on.
Appendixes
1. Address of Benjamin Graham before the annual Convention of the
National Federation of Financial Analysts Societies, May 1958.
Endnotes 587

===== PDF PAGE 602 =====


===== PDF PAGE 603 =====
Acknowledgments from Jason Zweig
My heartfelt gratitude goes to all who helped me update Graham’s
work, including: Edwin Tan of HarperCollins, whose vision and
sparkling energy brought the project to light; Robert Safian, Denise
Martin, and Eric Gelman of Money Magazine, who blessed this
endeavor with their enthusiastic, patient, and unconditional support;
my literary agent, the peerless John W. Wright; and the indefatigable
Tara Kalwarski of Money. Superb ideas and critical readings came
from Theodore Aronson, Kevin Johnson, Martha Ortiz, and the staff of
Aronson + Johnson + Ortiz, L.P.; Peter L. Bernstein, president, Peter
L. Bernstein Inc.; William Bernstein, Efficient Frontier Advisors; John
C. Bogle, founder, the Vanguard Group; Charles D. Ellis, founding
partner, Greenwich Associates; and Laurence B. Siegel, director of
investment policy research, the Ford Foundation. I am also grateful to
Warren Buffett; Nina Munk; the tireless staff of the Time Inc. Business
Information Research Center; Martin Fridson, chief executive officer,
FridsonVision LLC; Howard Schilit, president, Center for Financial
Research & Analysis; Robert N. Veres, editor and publisher, Inside
Information; Daniel J. Fuss, Loomis Sayles & Co.; F. Barry Nelson,
Advent Capital Management; the staff of the Museum of American
Financial History; Brian Mattes and Gus Sauter, the Vanguard Group;
James Seidel, RIA Thomson; Camilla Altamura and Sean McLaughlin
of Lipper Inc.; Alexa Auerbach of Ibbotson Associates; Annette Larson
of Morningstar; Jason Bram of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York;
and one fund manager who wishes to remain anonymous. Above all, I
thank my wife and daughters, who bore the brunt of my months of
round-the-clock work. Without their steadfast love and forbearance,
nothing would have been possible.

===== PDF PAGE 604 =====


===== PDF PAGE 605 =====
Index
591
A. & P . See Great Atlantic & Pacific
Tea Co.
AAA Enterprises, 144, 422, 433–37,
435n
Abbott Laboratories, 372
Aberdeen Mfg. Co., 385, 387
Acampora, Ralph, 190n, 217n
account executives. See “customers’
brokers”
accounting firms, 14, 501
accounting practices, 14, 169, 369;
“big bath”/“kitchen sink,”
428n; case histories about, 422,
424, 424n, 425, 576–77; and
dividends, 493, 493n; and
investor-management relations,
497; and market fluctuations,
202n; and per-share earnings,
310–21, 312n, 316n, 322, 324,
324n, 325n, 328–29; and security
analysis, 307, 308; and stock
options, 509n; and stock splits,
493, 493n. See also specific
company
acquisitions. See mergers and
acquisitions; takeovers; specific
company
active investor. See aggressive
investor
ADP Investor Communication
Services, 501n
ADV form, 274, 275, 277
Advent Capital Management, 419
advice: for aggressive investors, 258,
271; basic thesis about, 258; for
defensive investors, 117, 129–30,
258, 259, 271; and for defensive
investors, 363; do you need,
272–73; fees/commissions for,
258, 262, 263, 263n, 266, 270,
274n, 275; Graham’s views
about, 257–71; and interviewing
potential advisers, 276–77; and
investments vs. speculation, 20,
28, 29; and questions advisers
ask investors, 278–29; and role
of adviser, 257; sources of,
257–71, 258n; and speculation,
563; and trust and verification
of advisers, 273–75, 274n;
Zweig’s comments about,
272–79. See also type of source
Aetna Maintenance Co., 144, 575–76
Affiliated Fund, 230
age: and portfolio policy for
defensive investors, 102–3,
110–11n
aggressive investors: characteristics
of, 6, 133, 156, 159n, 175;
definition of, 133n; “don’ts” for,
133–44, 145–54; “do’s” for,
155–78, 179–87; expectations for,
29–34, 271; and investments vs.
speculation, 18–34; and mixing
aggressive and defensive, 176,
178; portfolio for, 101, 133–44,
145–54, 155–78, 179–87; and
preferred stocks, 98, 133, 
Editor's note: Entries in this index, carried over verbatim
from the print edition of this title, are unlikely to correspond
to the pagination of a given e-book's software reader. Nor
are these entries hyperlinked. However, entries in this index,
and other terms, may be easily located by using the search
feature of your e-book reader software.

===== PDF PAGE 606 =====
aggressive investors (cont.)
134–37, 134n, 139, 140, 142, 166,
173, 176–77, 381; psychology of,
382; recommended fields for,
162–75; return for, 29–34, 89;
rules for, 175–78; security
analysis for, 303n, 376–95; stock
selection for, 376–95
Air Products & Chemicals, Inc.,
450–53, 453n, 470
Air Reduction Co., 450–53, 453n, 470
airlines, 6, 6–7n, 7, 31, 82, 362, 364
Alabama Gas Co., 358
Alba-Waldensian, 387
Albert’s Inc., 387
Allegheny Power Co., 358
Allied Chemical Co., 289, 292, 351,
352
Allied Mills, 387
ALLTEL Corp., 372
Altera Corp., 370
alternative minimum tax, 106n
Altria Group, 372
Aluminum Company of America
(ALCOA), 289, 300, 310–21,
321n, 351, 352
Alvarez, Fernando, 329
Amazon.com, 21n, 41, 41n, 126,
308–9, 505
America Online Inc. See AOL Time
Warner
American & Foreign Power Co., 413,
415
American Brands Co., 351, 352
American Can Co., 289, 351, 352,
354, 355, 564–65
American Electric Power Co., 357
American Financial Group, 466n
American Gas & Electric Co., 97
American Home Products Co.,
453–55, 455n, 470
American Hospital Supply Co.,
453–55, 455n, 470
American Machine & Foundry, 315
American Maize Products, 385, 386,
387
American Power Conversion, 370
American Rubber & Plastics Co., 387
American Smelting & Refining Co.,
387
American Stock Exchange, 201, 403,
446, 450, 450n
American Telephone & Telegraph,
67, 135, 173, 200, 289, 295–97,
350, 351, 352, 354, 355, 358, 403,
410, 491
American Tobacco Co., 289
American Water Works, 358
Amerindo Technology Fund, 16,
243–45
Ameritas, 110
Ameritrade, 39
AMF Corp., 315
Amgen Inc., 370
AmSouth Bancorp, 372
Anaconda, 168, 289, 351, 352, 354,
355, 387
Analog Devices, 370
analysts. See financial analysts
Anderson, Ed, 542
Anderson Clayton Co., 387
Andreassen, Paul, 223
Angelica, 216
Anheuser-Busch, 321n, 372
annual earnings multipliers, 295–97
annual meetings, 489, 502
annual reports, 400, 502
annuities, 110, 110–11n, 226n
AOL Time Warner, 14, 306, 442–43,
497, 505
Apple Computer Inc., 510, 510n
Applegate, Jeffrey M., 81
Applied Materials, 370
Applied Micro Devices, 370
appreciation, 25, 26, 52, 135
arbitrages, 32, 32–33n, 174, 175,
380–81, 395
Archer-Daniels-Midland, 372, 387
Ariba, 478
Aristotle, 76
Arnott, Robert, 85n, 506, 506n
artwork, 56
“as if” statements. See pro forma
statements
592 Index

===== PDF PAGE 607 =====
Asness, Clifford, 506, 506n
asset allocation: and advice for
investors, 273, 275, 278; and
aggressive investors, 133,
156–57; and defensive investors,
22–29, 89–91, 102, 103–5; 50–50
plan of, 5, 90–91, 156–57; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 75; and inflation, 47–48;
and institutional investors, 194,
194n; and investments vs.
speculation, 10; and market
fluctuations, 194, 197; tactical,
194, 194n. See also
diversification
asset backing. See book value
assets: elephantiasis of, 246, 251, 252;
and per-share earnings, 317n,
320n; and security analysis, 281,
285; and stock selection for
aggressive investors, 381–82,
383, 385, 386, 388, 390, 391,
391n, 392, 398, 400; and stock
selection for defensive
investors, 338, 348, 349, 355,
356, 360, 365, 369, 370, 371,
374–75. See also asset allocation;
specific company
Association for Investment
Management and Research,
264n, 280n
AT&T Corp., 410n. See also American
Telephone & Telegraph
Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe, 135,
206, 209
Atlantic City Electric Co., 358
Aurora Plastics Co., 393, 395
Automatic Data Processing, 372
automobile stocks, 82
Avco Corp., 412
Avery Dennison Corp., 372
Avon Products, 456
Babson’s Financial Service, 259
Baby Center, Inc., 444
Bagdad Copper, 387
balance-sheet value. See book value
balance sheets, 200, 285, 308, 317n,
331, 337, 340, 365, 392. See also
specific company
balanced funds, 226
Baldwin (D. H.), 387
Ball Corp., 216, 482–83
Baltimore Gas & Electric Co., 358
BancBoston Robertson Stephens, 443
Bank of America, 372
Bank of New York, 82
Bank of Southwark, 141n
Bankers Trust, 235n
bankruptcy, 14, 16n, 144, 419–20n;
and aggressive investors, 144,
146, 156n, 174–75, 187, 384; of
brokerage houses, 266–68; case
histories about, 422–37, 423n;
and defensive investors, 100,
111, 362; and history and
forecasting of stock market, 70,
82; and investment funds, 235,
250; and market fluctuations, 4,
4n; and price, 423n; of railroads,
4, 4n, 362, 384, 423n; and
security analysis, 286, 287. See
also specific company
banks, 210, 414, 422; and advice,
258n, 268–70, 271; amd delivery
and receipt of securities, 268–69,
268n; and dividends, 493;
investing in, 360–61; and
investment funds, 235; and new
offerings, 269; and stock
selection for defensive
investors, 361; trust
departments of, 4, 29, 231, 235,
258–59, 259n. See also type of
bank or specific bank
Barber, Brad, 149, 150n, 151
Bard (C.R.), 372
bargains: and aggressive investors,
133–34, 155, 156, 166–73, 175,
177–78, 186, 380n, 381–82, 389,
390–93; and bonds, 166, 173,
173n; and common stock,
166–73, 177; and defensive
investors, 89, 96, 350; definition 
Index 593

===== PDF PAGE 608 =====
bargains (cont.)
of, 166, 177; and investment vs.
speculation, 33–34; and margin
of safety, 517–18; and market
fluctuations, 202, 206; and
preferred stocks, 166, 173; in
secondary companies, 170–73,
172n, 177–78; and value, 177
Baruch, Bernard M.: 125 DEL
Bausch & Lomb Co., 234
Baxter Healthcare Corp., 455n
BEA Systems, Inc., 323
bear markets, 46, 140n, 228n, 421,
525; and aggressive investors,
140n, 382; and defensive
investors, 89, 105, 111, 124, 131,
367, 371; and history and
forecasting of stock market,
65–72, 74, 80–87, 210; and
market fluctuations, 192–93,
193n, 194, 210, 224; silver lining
to, 17, 17n
“beating the market/average,” 9–10,
12, 76, 120, 157–58, 157n,
158–59n, 219–20, 237, 249,
250–52, 255, 275, 376–77, 377n,
379n, 397, 537–38
“beating the pros,” 217–20, 249n
Becton, Dickinson, 372
Belgian Congo bonds, 138
Bender, John, 147
Benjamin Graham Joint Account,
380n
Berkshire Hathaway, 162n, 217,
217n, 317n, 327, 401, 543, 544
Bernstein, Peter L., 55n, 529–30
Bernstein, William, 2n, 55n, 85n
Bethlehem Steel, 289, 351, 352
Bickerstaff, Glen, 245
Big Ben Stores, 387
Binks Manufacturing Co., 387
bio-technology stocks, 369
Biogen Inc., 370
Biomet Inc., 370
Birbas, Nicholas, 39
Black & Decker Corp., 330n
Block, Stanley, 264n
Blodget, Henry, 40–41, 343–44
Blue Bell, Inc., 455–58, 456n, 470
Bluefield Supply Co., 387
BOC Group, 453n
Bogle, John, 510
bond funds, 106–7, 110, 226, 283n,
420, 420n
Bond Guide (Standard & Poor’s), 423
bonds: and advice, 259, 261, 269,
271; and aggressive investors,
133–35, 134n, 136n, 139, 140,
155, 166, 173, 173n, 174–77; and
asset allocation, 10, 22–29,
89–91; and bargains, 166, 173,
173n; calls on, 97–98, 139; and
characteristics of intelligent
investors, 13; common stocks
compared with, 5n, 18–29,
56–57, 194; and convertible
issues and warrants, 210–11,
406, 412, 413, 415, 417; coupons
for, 98, 98n, 134, 134n, 135, 139;
“coverage” for, 284; defaults on,
88–89n, 173, 287, 423, 521; and
defensive investors, 22–29,
89–100, 101–11, 112n, 113, 114,
114n, 119, 121–22, 124, 125, 131,
176, 347, 350, 365; discount,
136n; distressed, 155–56n; and
diversification, 283n; earnings
on, 283–87; and Graham’s
business principles, 523; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 70, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 82,
87; inflation and, 5, 26, 47, 48,
50, 51, 56–57, 58n, 60n, 61n, 110;
interest on, 2, 3, 5, 22–29, 70, 76,
77, 78, 89, 93–94, 95, 98, 98n,
113, 121–22, 134n, 146, 207–12,
515, 515n, 516; and investment
funds, 226, 241; and
investments vs. speculation,
18–22; long- and short-term,
91–92, 106–7, 188; and margin
of safety, 512–13, 514, 515, 515n,
516, 520; and market
fluctuations, 188, 193, 194,
594 Index

===== PDF PAGE 609 =====
207–12; and new offerings, 8,
139, 140; price of, 23–24, 135,
136n, 207–12; ratings for, 95,
210, 211, 283n, 350n; and risk,
283–87; and role of investment
bankers, 268; safety of, 283–87;
second-grade, 134–37, 139, 145,
147; and security analysis, 281,
283–87, 293–94, 298n; selling at
par, 137; and size of enterprise,
285; taxes and, 22–25, 91–92, 93,
94, 95, 96, 96n, 99, 106, 106n,
155, 520; types of, 91–98; yield
on, 5, 8–9, 27, 78, 89, 91, 92, 93,
95, 96, 97, 98, 113, 114n, 124, 125,
134, 138, 146, 193, 207–12, 404,
408n, 573. See also bond funds;
convertible issues; specific
company or type of bond
book value, 420, 451n, 569; and
aggressive investors, 289, 381,
383–84, 389, 389n, 393; and
defensive investors, 348, 349,
351, 352–53, 354, 355, 359,
374–75; definition of, 374; and
market fluctuations, 198–200,
198n, 203n; and per-share
earnings, 320n, 321. See also
specific company
books, 56, 80–81
Borden Inc., 393, 395
Boskin Commission, 58n
brain: and market fluctuations,
220–23
brand names, 304, 374
Brearley, Richard A.: 61 DEL
bridge players analogy, 378–79
brokerage houses: and advice, 117,
257, 258n, 261–65, 262–63n,
266–68, 271, 274; discount, 129,
149, 262–63n; fees/commissions
of, 117, 128–29, 128n; financial
troubles of, 4, 4n, 266–68; full-
service, 262–63n; margin
accounts with, 21n; as part of
financial enterprise industry,
360n; and portfolio policy for
defensive investors, 117, 120,
129; volume of trades in,
266–68. See also online trading;
specific house
brokerage transactions: delivery of,
267–268, 267–68n
Bronson, Gail, 444n
Brooklyn Union Gas Co., 358
Brooks, John, 266n
Brown Shoe, 484–85, 484n
Browne, Christopher, 397
Buffett, Warren E.: and
diversification, 290n; and
GEICO, 533n; and indexing
funds, 249, 249n; and investors’
relationship with company,
162n; and market fluctuations,
217, 217n; and “owner
earnings,” 399; and per-share
earnings, 327; preface by, ix–x;
and security analysis, 308;
selection methods of, 400, 401;
“Superinvestors of Graham-
and-Doddsville” talk by,
537–60. See also Berkshire
Hathaway
Buffett Partnership, Ltd., 543, 552
bull markets, 55, 170, 233, 525, 570;
and bargains, 170, 172, 177;
characteristics of, 140, 192–94;
and convertible issues and
warrants, 404, 405, 405n, 408;
and dealings with brokerage
houses, 139, 267; death/end of,
17, 142, 210; history and
forecasting of, 65–73, 74, 76, 78,
80–87, 210; length of, 193n; and
market fluctuations, 192–94,
193n, 194, 197, 210; and new
offerings, 140, 140–41n, 142, 143,
144; and portfolio policy for
aggressive investors, 140,
140–41n, 142, 143, 144, 170, 172,
177
Bunker Ramo Corp., 330n
Burlington Northern Railroad, 362n
Burton-Dixie Corp., 393
Index 595

===== PDF PAGE 610 =====
Bush, George W., 496, 507n
business: buying the, 546; definition
of good, 308; knowing your, 523
business principles: of Graham,
523–24
“businessman’s investment,” 136–37
BusinessWeek, 20n, 81, 505
buy-low-sell-high approach, 192–94
“buy what you know,” 125–27, 126n
buying back shares. See repurchase
plans
buzzwords, investing, 172n
C.-T.-R. Co., 565–66
Cable & Wireless, 346
California Public Employees’
Retirement System, 146
calls, 97–98, 139, 406n, 407–8, 407n,
421
capital, 53, 302, 308–9, 320, 320n,
324–26, 401, 404, 414. See also
capital gains; capitalization;
return on invested capital
(ROIC); specific company
capital gains, 227, 571–72; and
market fluctuations, 219, 224n;
and portfolio for aggressive
investors, 149, 180n; taxes on,
75, 180n, 219, 360, 561, 562
Capital One Financial Corp., 477–79,
479n
capitalization, 123, 123n, 236, 288,
290–95, 331, 340, 384, 413, 414,
415
Career Academy, 234
Carnegie, Andrew, 185
Carnival Corp., 167n
Carolina Power & Light Co., 358
Carter, Jimmy, 60n
case histories: and Graham’s
comparison of eight pairs of
companies, 446–72; Graham’s
discussion of four “extremely
instructive,” 422–37; Graham’s
examples of, 575–78; Zweig’s
comments on four “extremely
instructive,” 438–45; and
Zweig’s comparison of eight
pairs of companies, 473–86
cash/“cash equivalents”: and
aggressive investors, 398, 400;
and defensive investors, 24, 25,
102, 103–4, 105, 107, 109–10,
124; and history and forecasting
of stock market, 82; and
security analysis, 303, 303–4n,
308
“cash in on the calendar,” 41–42, 46
Cassidy, Donald, 253
Caterpillar, 46
Center for Research in Security
Prices (University of Chicago):
30DEL
Central Hudson Gas and Electric
Co., 358
Central Illinois Light Co., 358
Central Maine Power Co., 358
Century Telephone Inc., 372
certificates of deposit, 97, 107, 108–9
certificates, stock, 198, 198n, 495,
495n
Certified Financial Planner (CFP),
276n
CGI (Commerce Group, Inc.),
481–82
Chambers, John, 184
charitable institutions, 47, 47n
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA),
264n, 265, 265n
Chase Manhattan Bank, 450n
Checkers Drive-In Restaurants, 216
chemical companies, 291, 291n, 292
Chesterton, G. K., 87
Cheung, Alexander, 15, 15–16n
Chicago and Northwestern Railway
Co., 317n
Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and
Pacific bonds, 135
China: stock market in, 437n
Chiron Corp., 370
Chromatis Networks, 439–40
Chrysler Corp., 165, 167, 168, 250,
289, 293, 351, 352, 354
Chubb Corp., 372
596 Index

===== PDF PAGE 611 =====
CIBC Oppenheimer, 40–41
Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co., 
358
Cingular Wireless, 327
Cisco Systems, Inc., 14, 81, 116n, 184,
217n, 247, 473–75, 505
Cleveland Electric Co., 357
CleveTrust Realty Investors, 414
Clorox Co., 372
closed-end funds, 141n, 226, 226n,
227, 238–41, 252–53, 253n, 420,
495n
CMGI, Inc., 215, 217, 481–82, 481n
CNBC, 342n
CNF Inc., 330n
CNN, 255
Coca-Cola, 217, 224, 224n, 304, 307,
372, 401
Cohen, Abby Joseph, 190n
Cohen & Steers Realty Shares, 63
coin flipping, 538, 539, 540
coins, buying and selling, 56
Colgate-Palmolive, 321n
College Marketing Group, 481n
Columbia Gas System, 357
Columbia Real Estate Equity Fund,
63
Comerica Inc., 372
Comiskey, Eugene, 329
Commerce One, Inc., 477–79
commercial banks, 97, 231, 257, 270,
360n, 429, 429n
common stock: and advice, 269, 271;
for aggressive investors, 134,
136, 139, 155–78, 156n, 376–95;
and asset allocation, 10, 89–91,
156–57; bonds compared with,
5n, 18–29, 56–57, 194;
characteristics of, 156; for
defensive investors, 22–29,
89–91, 99, 111, 112–23, 124–32,
176, 337–38, 347, 348–66;
dividends on, 22, 99, 114–15,
285n, 294–95, 334, 570, 571, 572;
earnings on, 115, 288–301, 569;
expected growth (1963 and
1969) of, 295–97; general long-
term prospects for, 291; general
observations on, 335–38; as
growth stock, 115–17, 157–62,
295–98, 517; and history and
forecasting of stock market, 70,
73, 74, 75, 76, 78; inflation and,
47–57; investment merits of,
112–14; investment rules for,
175–78; and investments vs.
speculation, 18–22; investor’s
personal situation and, 119–21;
as “junior stock issues,” 285n;
and margin of safety, 513–18,
571, 574; and market
fluctuations, 188, 189, 193, 194,
195–97, 199–200, 201, 203, 205;
performance of, 229; portfolio
changes in, 117; price decline in,
3; price record of, 406; public
attitude toward, 19–20, 20n;
return on, 113, 377; and risk,
20–21, 121–22, 394; security
analysis of, 281, 285, 288–301,
330–38, 339–46; selection of,
114–15, 134, 136, 139, 155, 156n,
157, 158, 160, 166, 169, 176–77,
178, 347, 348–66; valuation of,
288–90, 569–70; Value Line
Forecast (1967–69) about, 289.
See also specific topic
Commonwealth Edison Co., 357
companies: change in character 
of, 203; comparison of eight
pairs of, 446–72, 473–86;
comparison of four listed,
330–38, 339–46; emotional
imagery of, 474; general
observations about, 469–72;
investors’ relationship with,
162, 162n, 203; Johnny-One-
Note, 304; with large amounts
of convertible issues (1969), 412;
“large, prominent,
conservatively financed,”
122–23, 195; second-line, 196,
196n; unpopular large, 163–66,
168, 183. See also case histories; 
Index 597

===== PDF PAGE 612 =====
companies (cont.)
corporations; secondary
companies; specific company
computer industry, 6–7, 30, 172,
172n, 437
Comverse Technology, 186
ConAgra Foods, 372
Cone Mills, 391
conflicts of interest, 497, 500
conglomerates, 3, 411, 438, 440
Conseco, 14, 426n
Consolidated Edison, 357, 372,
567–68
Consolidated Gas of New York,
567–68
Consolidated Natural Gas Co., 
357
Consolidated Rail Corp. (Conrail),
425n
Consolidation Coal, 293
consumer-finance firms, 360n
Consumer Price Index, 58n, 59
Consumers Power Co., 358
contract: investment owner’s, 219,
225, 529
convertible issues: and aggressive
investors, 134, 173n, 381; and
defensive investors, 90, 97, 99,
100; example of working of,
418–19n; Graham’s discussion
about, 403–13; as junior to other
long-term debt, 419–20n; and
market fluctuations, 210–11;
and per-share earnings, 316,
318, 411, 414, 416; Zweig’s
comments about, 418–21. See
also warrants; specific company
Cooper Industries, 461n
corporate bonds, 24, 403, 520; and
aggressive investors, 134n;
and defensive investors, 92, 
95, 111, 350n; and inflation, 
50; and investment funds, 241;
and market fluctuations, 
203–4, 207–12; return on,
404–5n; and security analysis,
283, 283n
corporations: debt of, 53–54, 134;
and fluctuations in bond prices,
211–12; governance of, 206–7,
206n; investors’s relationship
with, 162, 162n, 203; “large,
prominent, conservatively
financed,” 122–23, 195;
misleading reporting by, 236;
taxes on, 99, 99n, 177;
unpopular large, 163–66, 168,
183. See also companies;
corporate bonds; specific
corporation
costs. See expenses/costs;
fees/commissions
coupons, 98, 98n, 134, 134n, 135, 139
Cowles Commission, 65, 66
Cramer, James J., 16, 16n, 217n
Crandall, Pierce & Co., 193n
crash, stock market: of 1929, 191,
236; of 1987, 141n, 401, 507n; of
2000, 14, 124, 141n, 173n, 291n,
437n
credit companies: investing in,
360–61
credit ratings, 134, 160, 420n, 573
Criterion Insurance Co., 533n
CSX Corp., 362n, 425n
“customer financings,” 439, 440
“customers’ brokers,” 263, 264, 271
“Daddy-Knows-Best,” 490n, 503–4
Damasio, Antonio, 223
Dana Corp., 375
Dante Alighieri, 535–36
Data General Corp., 342
Davis, Christopher, 308, 397, 398,
399, 400
Davis Funds, 250, 397, 398, 399, 400
day trading, 37, 39, 40n, 148, 528n
Dayton Power & Light Co., 358
debt: and aggressive investors, 385;
corporate, 53–54, 134; and
defensive investors, 348, 349,
352–53, 355, 370, 371; and
dividends, 492; of emerging
markets, 108–9; limit on, of U.S.
598 Index

===== PDF PAGE 613 =====
government, 94, 96; and margin
of safety, 513; of public utilities,
348; and security analysis, 303,
308; and selection of stock, 348,
349, 352–53, 355, 370, 371, 385.
See also bonds; specific company
or type of bond
Deere & Co., 173
defaults, 287, 521; and bargains, 173,
173n; on bonds, 88–89n, 173,
287, 423, 521; and portfolio
policy for aggressive investors,
138, 145, 147, 155–56n, 173, 173n
defensive investors: characteristics
of, 6; definition of, 22;
exclusions for, 176–77;
expectations for, 22–29; and
inflation, 47–57; and
investments vs. speculation,
18–29; and margin of safety,
515–16, 524; and market
fluctuations, 199–200; and
mixing aggressive and
defensive, 176, 178; portfolio
for, 89–100, 101–11, 112–23,
124–32; return for, 22–29, 25n,
27, 176; rules for, 176–77; and
security analysis, 294–95,
347–66; selectivity for, 363–66;
stock selection for, 347–66, 385n;
Zweig’s comments about,
367–75. See also specific topic
deflation, 51, 58n, 61n
delisted stocks, 385n
Delmarva Power & Electric Co., 358
Deltona Co., 234
depreciation, 316, 398, 492
Depression (1930s), 72, 131, 137, 170,
203, 213, 417, 521
Detroit Edison Co., 357
diamonds, 56
dilution: and convertible issues and
warrants, 411, 416, 417; and per-
share earnings, 311–12, 312n,
315, 316, 316n, 317, 318; and
repurchase plans, 507n, 508. See
also specific company
Dimson, Elroy, 61n, 82, 113n
direct purchase of stock, 128–29
directors, 309, 414, 488, 498, 499n,
500, 501, 502, 511
discount brokerage houses, 129, 149,
262–63n
Discover Brokerage, 38–39
diversification, 56, 87, 283n, 420; and
advice, 259n, 273; and
aggressive investors, 145, 173n,
381, 387–90, 391, 392–93; and
defensive investors, 114, 129,
129n, 130, 347, 365, 368–69, 371;
and delisted stocks, 385n; and
formula trading, 45; and
Graham’s disciples, 542;
importance of, 532, 535n; and
investment funds, 239, 245, 253;
and investments vs.
speculation, 37; and margin of
safety, 515, 516, 517, 518–19,
519n, 521, 522, 529, 531; and
market fluctuations, 219; and
security analysis, 283n, 290,
290n
dividends: academic criticism of,
494, 494n; and advice, 258, 264n;
and bargains, 166, 169, 172;
cumulative or noncumulative,
99; and earnings, 493–94, 506,
506n; and expectations for
defensive investors, 22–24, 25,
25n, 26, 27; fixed, 99; and
formula trading, 44, 45;
Graham’s comments about,
489–96; and growth, 490,
491–92, 506; and history and
forecasting of stock market, 65,
67, 69–70, 71, 72, 76, 77, 78, 80n,
85; inflation and, 48, 50, 52, 55;
and investor-management
relations, 489–96, 490n, 503–4,
511; and margin of safety, 514,
516, 523; and market
fluctuations, 191, 193, 202, 205,
207, 509n; overview about,
489–96; and “payout ratio,”
Index 599

===== PDF PAGE 614 =====
dividends (cont.)
294n, 489n; and per-share
earnings, 323; and performance
(1871–1970), 71; and portfolio
policy for aggressive investors,
134n, 136, 137, 145n, 166, 169,
172; and portfolio policy for
defensive investors, 43, 91, 98,
99, 99n, 111, 113, 113–14n,
114–15, 115n, 116, 118, 121, 122,
128; and price, 490, 491, 494n;
proper stock, 493; record of
paying, 114–15, 115n;
reinvestment of, 128, 489–92; of
secondary companies, 172; and
security analysis, 283, 285n, 288,
294–95, 298, 298n, 302, 309;
special, 494n; and speculation,
489, 490, 570, 571, 572; and
stock selection for aggressive
investors, 384, 386, 388, 390; and
stock selection for defensive
investors, 337, 348, 349, 350,
351, 352–53, 356, 356n, 362, 365,
371, 372; stock split and, 492–96,
493n; taxes on, 22–23, 24–25, 99,
294n, 495–96, 496n, 507n, 561,
562; total dollar amount of, by
U.S. stocks, 503n; and volatility,
509, 509n; who pays, 504;
Zweig’s comments about,
502–6. See also yield; specific
company or type of security
Dixon, Richard, 47n
Dodd, David, 542; See also Security
Analysis (Graham and Dodd)
“Dogs of the Dow,” 164, 164n
dollar-cost averaging, 2, 28–29, 75,
118, 130–31, 131n, 180n, 194,
529
Dollar General stores, 368
Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, 443
Donnelley (R.R.) & Sons, 372
dot.com stocks, 172n, 530
Double Click Inc., 418–19n
Dover Corp., 372
Dow Chemical Co., 317
Dow Jones Industrial Average
(DJIA): aggressive investors
and, 136, 158, 161, 163, 164,
164n, 165–66, 171, 376, 387–90;
and bargains, 171; “best” stocks
in, 363; and comparison of four
listed companies, 332, 333, 334,
335–36; defensive investors and,
91, 113, 114–15, 115n, 118, 347,
350–54, 356, 363, 367; and
dividend return on common
stocks, 22; in early 1970s, 4,
72–79; and expectations for
investors, 23, 24, 25, 27, 27n, 28,
33, 34; and formula trading, 44,
46; growth of, 297; and growth
stocks, 158; and history and
forecasting of stock market, 66,
67, 69, 70–71, 72–73, 74, 75, 76,
78, 79, 81; inflation and, 50,
51–55, 57; and investment
funds, 231, 231n, 233; and
market fluctuations, 190n,
191–92, 193n, 195, 196, 200, 201,
202, 208; and per-share
earnings, 319–21; and Raskob’s
prescription, 2; rise of
(1915–70), 50; and security
analysis, 289, 291, 292, 294,
295–97, 299; and selection of
stocks, 347, 350–54, 356, 363,
367, 376, 387–90; and unpopular
large companies, 163, 164, 164n,
165–66; yield of stocks (2003)
on, 5n. See also specific company
“Dow Theory,” 3, 33, 191–92, 195
Dreman, David, 374, 400
Drew, Daniel, 312n
Drexel Burnham Lambert, 164n, 187,
429n, 488n
Drexel Firestone Co., 164, 164n
Dreyfus Fund, 230
drug industry, 30
Du Pont Co., 289, 292, 351, 352
Du Pont, Glore, Forgan & Co., 
266n
dual-purpose funds, 228, 228n
600 Index

===== PDF PAGE 615 =====
due diligence, 274, 275, 375, 375n
Dundee, Angelo, 145
Durand, David, 199n, 570
e*Trade, 126
“earning power,” 53, 513, 513–14n,
514–15, 514n, 515–16, 517, 518,
568
earnings: and advice, 264n; average,
319–21; and bargains, 166,
167–69, 173; on capital funds,
320, 320n; “consensus” about,
374; debt and profits on capital
(1950–69), 53; and dividends,
493–94, 506, 506n; and
expectations for investors, 25n,
27, 33; hiding true, 428n; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 65, 69–70, 71, 72, 76, 77,
78, 85, 86; inflation and, 49,
51–55; and margin of safety,
513, 515n, 516–17; and market
fluctuations, 200, 202; owner,
308, 398, 399; and per-share
earnings, 315–16, 316–17n; and
performance (1871–1970), 71;
and portfolio policy for
aggressive investors, 134, 135,
136, 140, 146, 147, 160, 163, 165,
166, 167–69, 172, 173, 181, 182,
183; and portfolio policy for
defensive investors, 115, 115n,
116; real, 424; and repurchase
plans, 507, 509n; and security
analysis, 281, 283, 284, 288, 290,
291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 298,
305, 308; and speculation, 569;
and stock selection for
aggressive investors, 382–83,
384, 386, 388, 390, 392, 400; and
stock selection for defensive
investors, 337, 348, 349, 352–53,
354, 356, 364, 365, 371, 374. See
also “earning power”; per-share
earnings; price/earnings ratio;
specific company or type of
security
earnings-covered test, 283–87
Eastman Kodak Co., 46, 289, 351,
352
EDGAR database, 186, 250, 302–3,
306–7, 324n, 375, 399, 438n
Edison Electric Light Co., 21n
Edward VII (king of Great Britain),
313, 313n
“efficient markets hypothesis”
(EMH), 363, 363n, 380, 380n
Electric Autolite Co., 330
Electronic Data Systems, 375
electronics industry, 30, 172, 172n,
337, 437
Elias, David, 80
Ellis, Charles, 101, 256, 526n
eltra Corp., 330–38, 330n, 383
EMC Corp., 160n, 339–46, 342n
emerging-market nations, 108–9,
148, 148n
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 396
Emerson Electric Co., 330–38, 330n,
335n, 339–46, 372
Emery Air Freight, 330–38, 330n,
336–37n
Emhart Corp., 330–38, 330n, 383
employee-purchase plans, 432, 433n
employees: stock options for, 323.
See also managers/management
endowment funds, 194, 194n, 235,
235n
“enhancing shareholder value,” 309,
508–9, 508n
Enron Corp., 14, 127, 423n, 429n,
497, 500–501
enterprising investors. See
aggressive investors
EPS. See per-share earnings
Erie Railroad, 312n
ethics, 143n, 262, 262n, 269, 276n,
280
eToys Inc., 443–45, 443–44n
Eversharp Co., 409
exchange-traded index funds
(ETFs), 226n, 253, 253n
Exodus Communications, Inc.,
339–46
Index 601

===== PDF PAGE 616 =====
Expeditors International of
Washington, Inc., 307, 339–46
expenses/costs: controlling
ownership, 219; and convertible
issues and warrants, 419n, 420,
420n; of doing business, 317n; of
investment funds, 247, 248, 249,
251, 252, 253, 254; of mutual
funds, 376–77, 377n; of options,
421; and per-share earnings,
317n; of research, 376–77, 379n;
and stock selection for
aggressive investors, 376–77,
377n, 379n; and stock selection
for defensive investors, 367; of
trading, 363n, 377n, 379n, 385n.
See also fees/commissions
Factiva, 399
“fair-weather investments,” 521
Fama, Eugene, 504
Family Dollar Stores, 216, 372
Farley, William, 317n
Fastow, Andrew, 500–501
Faust (Goethe), 415–16
favorite stocks, 247, 247n
Fedders Co., 234
Federal National Mortgage
Association (“Fannie Mae”), 110
Federal Reserve Board, 2n, 19–20n,
50, 121
fees/commissions: for advice, 258,
262, 263, 263n, 266, 270, 274,
274n, 275; for aggressive
investors, 145n, 148–50, 148n,
149n, 180n; of brokerage
houses, 117, 128–29, 128n;
controlling, 219; and convertible
issues and warrants, 419n; of
investment funds, 227, 227n,
238n, 242, 246, 247, 249n, 250,
253n; and IPOs, 139n; and
market fluctuations, 200, 219;
and portfolio changes, 117; on
reinvestments, 253n; and
timing, 180n. See also
expenses/costs
Fidelity Funds, 15n, 37, 63, 64, 107,
110, 125, 148n, 230, 245–46, 250,
400, 420, 420n
50–50 plan, 5, 90–91, 156–57
financial analysts, 14, 264n, 498n,
501n; and advice, 262n, 263,
264–65, 271; collective
intelligence of, 380n; consensus
opinion of, 378; as creating
valuation, 568, 570; flaw in
approach to selection by, 379;
and forecasting, 265n; functions
of, 263, 265, 265n, 378; and
institutional investors, 265n;
and investments vs.
speculation, 28–29; and margin
of safety, 517; and market
fluctuations, 190, 206;
requirements for, 264; role of,
263, 280–81; senior and junior,
300; and speculation, 563, 568,
570, 574; and stock selection for
aggressive investors, 376, 378;
and stock selection for
defensive investors, 363. See also
securities analysis
financial condition: and common
stock, 293–94; and dividends,
492; and security analysis, 302,
308–9; and stock selection for
aggressive investors, 384, 385,
386, 388, 401; and stock
selection for defensive
investors, 337, 348, 349, 350,
369. See also specific company
Financial Corp. of America, 187
financial developments: major,
14–15
financial institutions/industry, 
139, 269, 360–61, 411n. See also
type of institution or specific
institution
financial markets: history and
forecasting of, 1–2, 10, 24n, 54,
54n, 65–79, 80–87. See also stock
market
financial plan, 273, 278
602 Index

===== PDF PAGE 617 =====
financial planners, 129, 258n, 259n,
263n, 270n, 274, 274n, 276
financial reports. See financial
statements; specific report
financial service
organizations/industry, 259–62,
360n
financial statements, 236, 324n,
328–29, 328n, 399, 432, 439, 442,
509n. See also per-share
earnings; security analysis; type
of report
First Tennessee National Bank, 
372
Firsthand mutual funds, 81, 126,
243–45
Fischhoff, Baruch, 127
Fisher, Kenneth, 185n
Fisher, Lawrence, 67n
fixed-value investments, 512–13. See
also type of investment
Fleet Boston Financial Corp., 384n
Florida real estate, collapse of, 144
fluctuations, market, 4, 188–225,
236n, 509n; and aggressive
investors, 33; and asset
allocation, 197; in bond prices,
207–12; book value and,
198–200, 198n, 203n; and brain,
220–23; and buy-low-sell-high
approach, 192–94; and
defensive investors, 189;
example of, 200–205; and
forecasting, 189–92, 190n, 206,
210; and formula investment
plans, 194–95, 195n; as guide to
investment decisions, 189–92;
history of (1871–1972), 65–72; of
investor’s portfolio, 195–97;
managers and, 206–7; and
margin of safety, 525; and
mispricing of stock, 212–13;
Morgan’s comments about, 54,
54n; and Mr. Market parable,
204–5, 212–25; and other
people’s mistakes, 221, 223;
silver lining to, 17, 224; timing
and pricing of, 189–92, 206; and
valuation, 188, 189, 195–207,
211, 212–13
FMC Corp., 545–46, 559–60
Food and Drug Administration,
U.S., 167n
“The Foolish Four” trading, 44–46
footnotes to financial statements,
315, 328–29, 328n, 399, 432, 439
Forbes magazine, 185, 185n, 337n
forced sale of stock, 203, 204
forecasting: addiction to, 221, 223;
and advice, 260–61; and
aggressive investors, 179–80,
184, 378; and “consensus”
earnings, 374; and defensive
investors, 131–32, 364, 364n,
374; and financial analysts,
265n; and history of stock
market, 72–79, 80–87; of
inflation, 48, 50, 54, 54n; and
investment funds, 255; and
investments vs. speculation,
24n; and market fluctuations,
189–92, 190n, 206, 210; and
Raskob’s prescription, 2;
reliability of, 10; and security
analysis, 281, 282n, 288–89,
291n, 293n, 298, 299; and
selection of stock, 364, 364n,
374, 378; and speculation, 572;
and timing, 179–80; the
unpredictable, 378
foreign stocks/bonds, 134, 138, 148,
148n, 176–77, 186–87, 239–40,
250, 252
formula investing/trading, 28–29,
41–46, 90–91, 192. See also
specific formula
formula plans/planners, 194–95,
195n
formula timing, 156–57
Fortune 500 list, 181, 426n, 500
Four Seasons Nursing, 234
401(k) plans, 64, 104, 105, 106, 111n,
126–27, 147, 215, 249
FPA Capital Fund, 397, 400
Index 603

===== PDF PAGE 618 =====
“franchise” companies, 172, 172n,
374, 401, 422, 433–37
Franklin, Benjamin, 124, 505
Franklin Utilities, 354n
fraud, 14, 236, 324n, 369, 413, 429n,
442n, 450n
French, Kenneth, 504
French assignats, 415, 415n
Fridson, Martin, 329
Friend-Blume-Crockett study, 377,
377n
friends or relatives: advice from, 270
Froelich, Robert, 81
Fruit of the Loom, 317n
fund industry. See investment funds
Fundamental Investments Co., 230
Galbraith, Steve, 38n, 369
Galileo Select Equities Fund, 245
Gallup Organization, 83, 84
Galvin, Thomas, 190n
“gambler’s fallacy,” 458n
gambling, 19n, 21, 36, 46, 199n, 368,
464, 518–19, 519n, 525, 530, 535,
535n
Gannett Co., 372
Gardner, John, 438
Gates, Bill, 162n, 185
GEICO. See Government Employees
Insurance Co.
General American Investors, 241
General Electric Co., 55, 160, 181,
182, 183, 247, 289, 295–97, 351,
352, 372, 575–73
General Foods Corp., 289, 351, 352
General Motors Corp., 2, 46, 166,
289, 292, 295–97, 351, 352, 410n
Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles (GAAP), 316n, 325n
Georgeson Shareholder, 501n
Gillette, 217, 304, 307, 401
Glassman, James K., 80, 102n
Global Crossing Ltd., 14, 127, 303,
304n, 324–25, 325n, 326, 497
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang Von,
415–16
gold, buying, 55, 55–56n
Goldman Sachs & Co., 404n, 443
good decisions: factors that
characterize, 528–29
Goodbody & Co., 266n
goodwill, 374, 389, 389n, 390, 392,
398, 428, 439, 440, 441n, 453, 568
Goodyear Tire Co., 289, 351, 352
Gordon, Robert N., 224n
Gordon equation, 25n
Government Employees Financial
Corp., 533n
Government Employees Insurance
Co. (GEICO), 228n, 494, 532–33,
532–33n, 535, 535n
Government National Mortgage
Association (“Ginnie Mae”), 110
Graham, Benjamin: Buffett’s tribute
to, ix, x; business principles of,
523–24; definition of investment
of, 19, 35, 35n, 45; disciples of,
537–60; forecasts of, 25, 25n;
misjudgements of, 49–50, 50n;
Zweig’s comments about, xi–xiv
Graham, John R., 180, 180n
Graham-Newman Corp., 228n,
380–83, 380n, 533n, 541
Graham-Newman methods:
summary of, 380–83
Graham’s Law, 46
Grainger (W. W.), 372
Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co.,
200–205, 202n
greed, 197, 437, 437n
Greenspan, Alan, 179–80
Group Rexel, 469n
growth, 15, 228, 264n, 414; average,
319–21; calculation of past rate
of, 319–21; definition of, 157;
and dividends, 490, 491–92, 506;
and history and forecasting of
stock market, 73, 85, 87, 184;
and margin of safety, 516, 517;
and market fluctuations, 9,
199n; mutual funds for, 158n,
159n, 161, 228n; and per-share
earnings, 319–21, 321n; and
portfolio policy for aggressive
604 Index

===== PDF PAGE 619 =====
investors, 156, 157–62, 158–59n,
181–84; and portfolio policy for
defensive investors, 114, 115–17,
123; real, 85, 87; and risk, 160;
and security analysis, 281, 282,
282n, 294–98, 300, 305; slow
down in, 321n; speculative, 85,
87, 569, 570; and stock selection
for aggressive investors, 379,
384, 386, 390, 392, 401; and
stock selection for defensive
investors, 338, 347, 348, 349–50,
352–53, 354, 355, 356, 364, 369,
371, 374; and types of investors,
6–8. See also specific company
Guerin, Rick, 544
Gulf & Western Inc., 412
Gulf Oil, 488n
H & R Block, Inc., 401, 455–58, 456n,
470
Harley Davidson, 304
Harvey, Campbell R., 180, 180n
Hassett, Kevin A., 80, 102n
Hawkins, O. Mason, 399–400
Hayden, Stone & Co., 266n
Haydon Seitch and Instrument Co.,
576
Hazlitt, William, 313n
hedging: and aggressive investors,
381; and convertible issues and
warrants, 420n; and defensive
investors, 106n; and definition
of intelligent investors, 13, 13n;
and expectations for investors,
26n, 32, 33n; and half a hedge,
61; and inflation, 55–56, 61; and
investment funds, 226–27, 227n;
“related” and “unrelated,” 381,
381n, 382, 382n
Heine, Max, 396
Heinz (H.J.), 373
Hennessy funds, 44n
herding, 247, 546
high-yield bonds. See junk bonds
Hoffman, Mark, 478, 479
“home bias,” 127
Home Depot, 181, 182, 183
Honda, 250
Honeywell Corp., 330n
Horizon Corp., 234
hostile takeovers, 32–33n, 429n, 488n
Household International, 373
Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), U.S. Department of, 96n
Housing Authority bonds, 94–95, 96
Houston Light & Power Co., 357
“How much?” question, 8–9, 15
Hudson Pulp & Paper, 543
“human factor” in selection, 365
Huron Consulting Group, 324n
hyperinflation, 60n
I-bonds, 110
Ibbotson Associates, 61n, 62, 131,
131n, 404n, 419
“In the Money” (CNN-TV), 
126n
income, 106–7, 136, 259, 398, 419,
421, 516, 571–72. See also specific
company
income bonds, 99–100, 136
income tax. See taxes
“incubated funds,” 246
indexing funds: and advice, 277n;
and aggressive investors, 180,
396; Buffett’s advice about,
249n; compulsory holdings for,
476; and convertible issues and
warrants, 419n; and defensive
investors, 124, 130, 132, 347n,
367, 368, 375n; flaws of, 249;
and investment funds, 248–49,
248n, 249; and market
fluctuations, 219; and security
analysis, 290n; of total U.S.
stock market, 347n, 367. See also
exchange-traded index funds
(ETFs)
industrial bonds, 155, 284, 285, 
287
Industrial National Bank of Rhode
Island, 384, 384n
industrial stocks, 359, 387–90
Index 605

===== PDF PAGE 620 =====
industry: analysis of, 298–99;
predicting growth of, 6–8, 6–7n
inflation, 3, 24, 47–57, 58–64, 294;
accuracy of rate of, 58n; as
dead, 58, 58n, 59–60; and
defensive investors, 23, 25n, 26,
26n, 102, 113, 114, 364n; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 48, 50, 54, 54n, 83, 85,
86, 87; and money illusion,
59–60; nominal and real, 59; and
price, 49, 61, 62; protection
against, 23, 55–56, 61–64; and
Raskob’s prescription, 2n; and
returns/yield, 50, 54, 57, 62; and
risk, 47n, 55, 57; and taxes, 50,
63–64; and value, 58. See also
type of security
Informix Corp, 328–29n
InfoSpace, Inc., 323, 428–29n
initial public offerings (IPOs), 139,
139n, 140, 140–41n, 142–43n,
150–54, 246, 270n, 312n, 434–35,
435n, 438, 444n, 528n. See also
specific company
Inktomi Corp., 212–13
Insana, Ron, 342n
insider trading, 479n
institutional investors, 115, 194,
194n, 249n, 265n, 343, 375, 501n
insurance companies, 177, 210,
211–12, 360n, 495n, 501n, 518
Intel Corp., 160n
intelligent investors: as businesslike,
523; characteristics of, 13–14;
and “controlling the
controllable,” 219; ways of
being, 101–2
interest, 15, 258, 505n; and
aggressive investors, 134, 134n,
135, 136, 140, 146, 147, 160, 173;
and bargains, 173; compound,
570; and Cramer’s
recommendations, 16; and
defensive investors, 89, 93–94,
95, 97, 98, 98n, 99, 99n, 100,
106–7, 106n, 109, 110, 111, 113,
121–22, 364n; and expectations
for investors, 22–29, 33; fixed,
211; and history and forecasting
of stock market, 70, 76, 77, 78;
inflation and, 54, 55; and
margin of safety, 515, 515n, 516;
and security analysis, 283, 284,
298, 298n, 301, 308; and taxes,
99n, 100, 561, 562. See also
specific company or type of
security
International Business Machines
(IBM), 6, 7, 73, 116, 116n, 160,
199, 234, 295–97, 384, 390, 392,
456, 491, 565–67, 578
International Flavors & Fragrances,
458–61, 458n, 470
International Game Technology, 216
International Harvester Co., 289,
295–97, 351, 352, 458–61, 458n,
460n, 470
International Nickel, 289, 311, 351,
352
International Paper Co., 289, 351,
353
International Telephone &
Telegraph, 412
Internet: as source of advice, 258n
Internet companies, 6n, 14, 15,
40–41, 270n, 337n, 435n, 437n,
508n, 530
investment banks/bankers, 141,
360n, 428–29n; and advice, 257,
268–70; and aggressive
investors, 140, 141, 142–43n,
152, 172n; and IPOs, 435n, 437;
and reform of Wall Street, 437,
437n; role of, 268–70
Investment Company of America,
230
investment contracts, 219, 225, 529
investment counseling firms, 20, 28,
29, 258–59, 259n, 260, 270
investment funds: and advertising,
251; advice about, 231; and
aggressive investors, 152, 159,
376–78; aim/purpose of, 227,
606 Index

===== PDF PAGE 621 =====
228, 229; asset elephantiasis of,
246, 251, 252; and balanced
fund investments, 241; bank-
operated, 4, 235; and “beating
the market,” 250–52, 255;
changes in, 254; closed end vs.
open end, 238–41; closing of,
251, 252; and common stock,
226, 229, 231, 236, 241, 249n;
and daring to be different, 250,
252; and defensive investors, 29,
226, 360–61; dividends on, 227,
238; and earnings, 227, 232;
expenses/costs of, 227, 227n,
238n, 242, 246, 247, 248, 249,
249n, 250, 251, 252, 253, 253n,
254; Graham’s comments about,
226–41; and growth stocks, 7,
228; and “hot” stocks, 6–7n; and
interest, 227; managers of, 4,
229–32, 245–46, 246n, 247, 249,
250, 252, 254; method of sale of,
227; number of, 226;
overvalued, speculative
investments of, 5; performance
of, 229–32, 237, 243–45, 248, 251,
252, 253, 254; price of, 250;
questions about, 228; rating of,
252, 252n; registration of, 226,
226n; regulation of, 226, 237;
return on, 241, 246, 247, 248,
249, 250, 252, 253, 254, 255; and
risk, 232, 233, 237, 246, 247, 251,
252; selection of, 255, 360–61,
376–78; sheepish behavior in,
247; taxes on, 227, 241, 250, 251,
254; time to sell, 254, 256;
turnover of stock in, 247;
types/classification of, 226, 228;
Zweig’s comments about,
242–56. See also closed-end
funds; mutual funds
“Investment Owner’s Contract,”
219, 225
investment policy statement, 
278
investment trusts, 226n
investments: conventional and
nonconventional, 520;
definition of, 519; expectations
for, 22–34; “fair-weather,” 521;
Graham’s comments about,
18–34, 520–24; Graham’s
definition of, 19, 35, 35n, 45;
importance of long-term,
565–66; of large sums of money,
543; major change since 1964 in,
22–24; margin of safety as
central concept of, 512–24;
opportunities for, 521, 532–34;
speculation vs., 10, 18–34,
35–46, 519–20; Zweig’s
comments about, 35–46. See also
specific topic
investors: active and passive, 101–2;
activism of, 460, 460n;
beginning, 128; consistency of,
402; controlling behavior of,
24n, 223, 278, 529, 530; courage
of, 524, 535; definition of long-
term, 150; discipline of, 24n,
105, 193n, 220, 402; and
dividends, 489–96; elderly, 17;
emotions of, 8, 14, 19, 102, 193n;
and “enhancing shareholder
value,” 309; expectations for,
22–34, 25n, 27, 219; functions of,
497–98; Graham’s comments
about, 487–96; inflation and,
47–57; as intelligent owners,
499, 501–2; interests of, 499,
508n, 510; investment contract
of, 219, 225, 529; ironical
situation of, 364n; managers as,
250, 252; and
managers/management,
487–96, 497–511, 498n, 502–6;
meaning of term, 18–22;
measuring success of, 217–20;
as mixed aggressive and
defensive, 176, 178; and other
people’s mistakes, 203, 221, 223;
personal situation of, 119–21;
predicting behavior of, 24n, 223;
Index 607

===== PDF PAGE 622 =====
investors (cont.)
primary cause of failure by,
217n; and proxy materials,
499n, 500–502, 501n; psychology
of, 8, 51, 103, 119, 196, 272–73;
“reckless,” 19; relationship with
company of, 162, 162n, 203; self-
defeating behavior of, 12, 15;
self-knowledge of, 102; sheep
behavior of, 498; speculators
distinguished from, 1–2, 10,
18–34, 35–46, 205–6; theory vs.
practice regarding, 497–98,
498n; as thinking of self, 215,
217; types of, 6; and whose
money is it?, 502–6; Zweig’s
comments about, 497–511. See
also type of investor
Investors Stock Fund, 230
IPOs. See initial public offerings
IRA accounts, 64, 111n
ITI Corp., 384
J. B. Hunt Transportation, 216
J. P . Morgan Chase, 82
Jackson, Phil, 39
Jacob (Ryan) Internet Fund, 236n
Jantzen Inc., 391, 392
“January effect,” 41–42, 46
Janus Global Techology Fund,
243–45
Japan, 61n, 187
JDS Uniphase Corp., 14, 323, 505,
527–28
Jeddo Highland Coal, 543
Jefferson-Pilot, 373
Jesus: Graham’s reference to, 498n
Jobs, Steve, 510
Johnny-One-Note Co., 304
Johns Manville Corp., 175n, 289, 351,
353
Johnson & Johnson, 183, 183n, 305,
373
Johnson Controls, 373
Jones, Charles, 128n
Jordan, Michael, 83
Jos. A. Bank Clothiers, 216
junior stock issues. See common
stock
junk bonds, 96, 96n, 108–9, 145–47,
145n, 173n, 251, 420n, 429n,
488n
Juno Online Services, 40, 40n
“just do what works,” 42–44
Kadlec, Charles, 80
Kahneman, Daniel, 151, 221, 528
Kaplan, G. E., 235–36
Karp, Morris, 450n
Kayos, Inc., 447n
Kayser-Roth Co., 393, 395
Keck family, 491n
Kemper Funds, 81
Keogh accounts, 64
KeyCorp, 373
Keynes, John Maynard, 133n
Kierkegaard, Soren, 180
Kimberly-Clark, 373
King Resources Co., 234
Klingenstein, J. K., 525–26
Knapp, Tom, 542
Kozlowksi, L. Dennis, 442n
Kutyna, Donald, 339
Lamont, Owen, 139n
Landis, Kevin, 81, 126, 126n
Lasus, Jay, 369
lawsuits, 175, 175n
Lee, Kate Leary, 180
Leffler, Edward G., 242
Legg Mason Value Trust, 397, 399
Leggett & Platt, 373
Lehman Corp., 241
Lessons for Investors (Graham), 571,
572
letter stocks, 3, 3n, 227, 227n, 236
Leuthold Group, 337n
leverage, 294
leveraged buyouts, 32–33n, 429n
Levin, Gerald M., 442, 443
LexisNexis, 399
liabilities, 348, 355, 356, 369, 370,
371, 385, 391n, 398. See also
specific company
608 Index

===== PDF PAGE 623 =====
Lichtenberg, G. C., 497
life insurance, 89, 118, 361
Lilly (Eli), 373
Linear Technology, 370
Ling-Temco-Vought Inc., 4n, 412,
417, 422, 425–29, 425–26n
Lipper, Inc., 248, 253
liquidations, 32, 381
liquidity, 203, 312n
LJM Corp., 500–501
load funds, 227
Lockheed Martin, 216
“long run”: how long is, 113n
Long-Term Capital Management
L.P ., 13
Longleaf Partners, 250, 251, 399–400
Loomis, Carol, 181
Lorie, James H., 67n
losses, 224, 273, 420, 421; “carrying
forward,” 318n; cost of, 526; and
Graham’s definition of
investment, 35, 35n; importance
of avoiding, 12–13; and margin
of safety, 516, 518, 525–28, 529,
530; and per-share earnings,
314, 316, 318n; “really
dreadful,” 15; and taxes, 561,
562. See also specific company
low-multiplier stocks, 387–90, 400,
451, 515–16
Lowe’s Companies, 373
LSI Logic Corp., 370
LTV Corp., 426n
Lubin, Melanie Senter, 275
Lucent Technologies Inc., 14, 303,
438–40
luck, 243, 396, 525, 533, 535n
Lynch, Peter, 15n, 125–26, 250
“mad money” account, 21–22, 46
Mairs & Power Growth Fund, 251
managers/management:
compensation for, 306, 316n,
401, 501, 507–8, 509, 509n,
510–11; competence of, 293, 487,
499; and convertible issues and
warrants, 411; and daring to be
different, 250, 252; and
dividends, 341n, 489–92;
efficiency of, 499, 503;functions
of, 508n; Graham’s comments
about, 487–96; and interests of
investors, 499, 508n, 510; of
investment funds, 229–32,
245–46, 246n, 247, 249, 250, 251,
252, 254, 290n; investors’s
relations with, 487–96, 497–511,
498n; and market fluctuations,
206–7; migrating, 245–46;
misbehavior of, 14, 497; and
per-share earnings, 315–16, 322;
poor, 488; as promoters, 307;
and repurchase plans, 506–9;
reputation of, 251; and security
analysis, 293, 302, 305–7, 309; as
shareholders, 250, 252; stock
options for, 322, 507–8, 507n,
509, 509n, 510–11; and stock
selection for aggressive
investors, 379, 399–400, 401,
402; wealth of, 341n; and whose
money is it?, 502–6
Manhattan Fund, Inc., 233–35
margin accounts, 21–22, 21n, 47n,
193, 267
margin of safety, 10, 296, 301, 349,
371, 399, 401, 512–31, 515n,
519n, 537, 547, 571, 574
Marsh, Paul, 113n
Massachusetts Investment Trust, 230
mathematics, 569–70
Mattel Inc., 234, 303
Maxim Integrated Products, 370
Maxwell Motors Co., 293
May Department Stores, 373
McCormick Harvesting Machine
Co., 458n
McDonald’s Corp., 373
McGraw Edison, 461–62, 461n, 470
McGraw-Hill, Inc., 135, 373, 461–62,
461n, 470, 471, 472
Merck & Co., 373
Mergenthaler Linotype Enterprises,
330
Index 609

===== PDF PAGE 624 =====
mergers and acquisitions: and
aggressive investors, 173, 174,
381, 389n, 393, 393n, 401; and
case histories, 422, 424, 424n,
426, 426n, 438, 440–43, 441n;
and defensive investors, 374;
and dividends, 505, 505n; and
investments vs. speculation, 32,
33n; and per-share earnings,
323; and security analysis, 303,
303n; serial, 474n; stock vs. cash
in, 505n
Merrill Lynch & Co., 266n, 405n,
406n, 410n, 443
Micron Technology, 326–27
Microsoft, 115n, 116n, 150, 151, 162n,
185, 247, 505, 505n
MicroStrategy, 368, 369
Miller, Merton, 494n
Miller, William, 397, 399
Minkow, Barry, 433–34n
Minnie Pearl’s Chicken System Inc.,
463, 466
Mobil Corp., 491n
Modigliani, Franco, 494n
Money Magazine, 45, 255, 368, 
530
“money managers,” 235–36, 237,
360n, 400, 501n
money-market funds, 107, 108–9
“Moneyline” (CNN program), 81
monopolies, 304, 356, 401
Montaigne, Michel de, 272
Monument Internet Fund, 15,
15–16n, 243–45
Moody’s Investment Service, 95,
260, 501n
Morey, Matthew, 252n
Morgan Fun-Shares, 253
Morgan Guaranty Bank, 235n
Morgan Stanley, 39, 115n, 371,
374–75
Morgan, J. P ., 54, 54n
Morningstar: ratings by, 252;
website for, 129n, 148n, 157n,
159n, 183, 186, 227n, 252n, 374n,
375, 397, 420n
mortgages, 108–9, 110, 173, 360–61,
360n
Motorola, 81
Mr. Market parable, 204–5, 212–25,
380n, 531
Mr. Tax of America, 433n, 434
Mulford, Charles, 329
Munger, Charles, 401, 544, 554–55
municipal bonds, 24, 259, 520; and
aggressive investors, 134n, 155;
and defensive investors, 92, 95,
106, 106n, 108–9; fluctuations in
price of, 208, 210; and
investment funds, 251, 253
Murray, Nick, 278
mutual funds: and aggressive
investors, 141n, 145, 145n, 147,
148, 158n, 159n, 187, 377, 377n,
379n; as almost perfect, 242; and
“buy what you know” picking,
127; characteristics of, 242;
closed-end funds vs. open-end,
238–41; closing of, 237–38n; and
convertible issues and
warrants, 420; and corporate
bonds, 283n; decline in funds
invested in, 17; and defensive
investors, 28, 28n, 89, 96n, 105,
128, 128n, 129–30, 354n, 356n,
360–61, 369; expenses/costs of,
128n, 219, 242, 376–77, 377n;
“focused” portfolios of, 290n;
foreign stocks and bonds in,
148, 187; and formula trading,
44; and growth stocks, 158n,
159n, 161; and inflation, 64;
introduction of, 242; for junk
bonds, 145n, 147; managers of,
290n; and market fluctuations,
6–7n, 7, 218; and new offerings,
141n; performance of, 229–32,
242, 245n, 377, 377n; precious
metals, 56n; and public attitude
about stocks, 20n; registration
of, 226, 226n; as “regulated
investment company” (RIC),
227–28n; return on, 253, 290n;
610 Index

===== PDF PAGE 625 =====
and secondary companies,
172n; and security analysis,
290n; small-cap, 369; and
speculation, 5, 37; and “sure
things,” 15, 15–16n; taxes on,
227–28n, 242, 562–63; types of,
226–27, 227n. See also
investment funds; specific fund
Mutual Series Funds, 396
name brands, 392, 401
NASDAQ, 38, 81, 149n, 152, 186,
190n, 217n, 359, 406n, 414n
National Biscuit Co., 393
National Cash Register, 234
National General Corp., 4n, 412,
415, 463–66, 466n, 470,
472
National Investors Fund, 230
National Presto Industries, 168, 
391, 393, 463–66, 466n, 470,
514
National Student Marketing Corp.,
234, 235n, 481n
Navistar, 458n, 460n
Neff, John, 228n
Nelson, F. Barry, 419
net asset value. See book value
net current assets. See working
capital
neuroscience of investing, 220–23
New Community debentures, 95, 96,
155
New Haven Railroad, 286
New Housing Authority, 96, 96n,
155
new offerings, 172, 253n, 405; and
advice, 268–69; and aggressive
investors, 134, 139–44, 172,
174–75, 176–77, 392; and case
histories, 433–37; of common
stock, 139n, 141–44, 269; and
defensive investors, 176; and
investments vs. speculation, 28;
and market fluctuations, 193;
and per-share earnings, 312n;
and role of investment bankers,
268–69. See also initial public
offerings
New York Central Railroad, 424n
New York Edison Co., 567–68
New York Institute of Finance, 473
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE):
advice from members of, 261,
264, 267, 270, 271; bankruptcy
of firms registered with, 266;
and bargains, 186; closing bell
on, 35; comparison of four
companies listed on, 330–38;
and comparison of securities, 1;
and convertible issues and
warrants, 413n; costs of trading
stocks on, 149n; “customers’
brokers” as registerd with, 264;
and dealings with brokerage
houses, 138, 139, 266, 267; and
dividends, 493, 493n, 494n; fees
for stock listed on, 128n;
highest-price stock on, 491n;
and per-share earnings, 315;
and portfolio policy for
aggressive investors, 186; and
stock selection for aggressive
investors, 202, 377, 377n; and
stock selection for defensive
investors, 356; and stock splits,
493, 493n; turnover of stock on,
37, 266–67; and World War I, 10
New York Trap Rock Co., 543
Newman, Jerome, 532–33, 532–33n
Newman, Paul, 447n
news, stockmarket, 221–23, 223n
Newton, Isaac, 13–14, 15
Niagara-Mohawk Power Co., 357
“Nifty Fifty” stocks, 336–37n
Nissim, Doron, 506, 506n
Nixon, Richard M., 50n
no-load funds, 227, 227n, 239
Nokia, 81
nonconvertible bonds, 98–99, 134
Norfolk & Western, 425
Norfolk Southern Railroad, 217n,
362n, 425n
Norsk Hydro, 250
Index 611

===== PDF PAGE 626 =====
Nortek, Inc., 483–84
Nortel Networks, 184, 483–84
Northern Pacific Railway, 168,
207–8, 209
Northwest Industries Inc., 317–18,
317n, 412
Norway bonds, 138
Novellus Systems, 370
Nucor Corp., 373
NVF Corp., 411, 422, 429–33, 429n,
433n, 576–77
Nygren, William, 397, 399
Oakmark Fund, 251, 397, 399
Odean, Terrance, 149, 150n, 151
oil companies, 291, 291n, 292
online message boards, 502
online trading, 38–39, 128, 272, 344,
345
open-end funds, 116, 237–38n,
238–41. See also mutual funds
OPM (Other People’s Money), 303,
303–4n
opportunities: recognizing, 532–34,
535n
options, call, 421
options, stock, 3, 3n, 306, 308, 316n,
322, 323, 398, 400, 421, 507–11,
507n, 509n, 522n. See also
warrants; specific company
Oracle Corp., 505, 508–9
Orbitex Emerging Technology Fund,
16n, 244
orders: execution of, 267–68
O’Shaughnessy, James, 42–44, 44n,
45
overvaluation, 5, 14, 81, 172, 246,
261, 505; and aggressive
investors, 163, 172, 382;
“gambler’s fallacy” about, 
458n; and repurchase plans,
508n, 509. See also specific
company
Owens-Illinois Glass Co., 289, 351,
353
owner earnings, 308, 398, 399
owners: intelligent, 499, 501–2
P/E ratio. See price/earnings ratio
Pacific Gas & Electric Co., 357
Pacific Partners, Ltd., 556
PacTel, 327
PaineWebber, 41, 83
Palm, Inc., 479–80
Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co.,
357
Parker Pen Co., 391, 392
Pascal, Blaise, 35, 392, 529–31
“Pascal’s wager,” 392n, 529–31
patents and trademarks, 374
PBHG Technology &
Communications Fund, 243–45
Penn Central Railroad, 4n, 94, 286,
362, 384, 422, 423–25, 423n,
424n, 425n, 466n, 564–65
Pennsylvania Electric Co., 424
pension funds, 84, 194, 194n, 308,
316n, 327–28, 398, 429n, 501n,
545–46. See also specific company
Peoples Gas Co., 357
PepsiCo Inc., 373, 477
per-share earnings: and aggressive
investors, 398; and common
stock, 318, 320; and convertible
issues and warrants, 316, 318,
411, 414, 416; and defensive
investors, 338, 348, 351; and
dividends, 492; Graham’s
comments about, 310–21; and
margin of safety, 514n; and
repurchase plans, 506–7, 508;
Zweig’s comments, 322–29. See
also specific company
performance: and advice, 275; and
aggressive investors, 172n,
376–78, 377n, 379n, 388; and
defensive investors, 348, 356;
factors influencing, 85; and
Graham’s definition of
investment, 35, 35n; of growth
stocks, 451–52n; and market
fluctuations, 203; and per-share
earnings, 321; of secondary
companies, 172n; and security
analysis, 291n, 292, 293n,
612 Index

===== PDF PAGE 627 =====
299–301; of value stocks,
451–52n; vogue of, 4. See also
“beating the market/average”;
specific company or type of
security
performance funds, 228, 228n,
232–37
Performance Systems Inc., 463
Perimeter (Stan) Investments, 545,
557
periodicals: as source of advice,
257–58, 258n
Perot, H. Ross, 266n
Petersburg Paradox, 570
Pfizer, Inc., 167n, 247, 373
Philadelphia Electric Co., 357
Philip Morris, 175n
Pickens, T. Boone, 488n
Piecyk, Walter, 41
Pier 1 Imports, 216
Pimco, 110
Pinault-Printemps-Redoute Group,
469n
Plato, 251
Plexus Group, 42, 149n
Polaroid, 234, 392
portfolio: for aggressive investors,
101, 133–44, 145–54, 155–78,
179–87, 376–95; autopilot,
128–29, 130–32, 223; basic
characteristics of, 89; changes
to, 117; chaotic, 273; as
combination of active and
passive ways of investing, 102;
and common stocks, 112–23,
124–32; for defensive investors,
89–100, 101–11, 112–23, 124–32,
337–38, 347–66; Graham’s
concept of appropriate
individual, 18–34; inflation and,
47–57; “laddered,” 106n; market
fluctuations and, 195–97;
negative approach to
development of, 133–44, 145–54;
100– stock, 105; overview about,
1–11; own corporation stock in,
126–27; positive approach to
development of, 155–78, 179–87;
rebalancing of, 104–5, 180n, 197,
219; vodka-and-burrito, 148. See
also asset allocation; selection,
stock
portfolio trackers, 117n, 397
Posner, Victor, 429n
PPG Industries, 373
“pre-emptive right,” 414
precious metals, 55, 55–56n
predictions. See forecasting
preferred stock: and aggressive
investors, 98, 133, 134–37, 134n,
139, 140, 142, 166, 173, 176–77,
381; and balanced funds, 241;
and bargains, 166, 173; and
convertible issues and
warrants, 404, 405, 406, 406n,
412, 415, 417; and defensive
investors, 89, 98–99, 100, 108–9,
111, 121, 176, 365; dividends on,
98–99, 99n, 134n, 285n, 323, 404,
516; and Graham’s business
principles, 523; and inflation,
48; and investment funds, 241;
and margin of safety, 512, 513,
516, 520; and new offerings,
140, 142, 405; and per-share
earnings, 318, 323; price
fluctuations in, 210–11; price
record of, 405, 406; ratings for,
210; recommended “coverage”
for, 284; and risk, 283–87; and
security analysis, 281, 283–87,
293–94, 308; as senior stock
issues, 285n; switches between
common and, 411–13; yield on,
573. See also specific company
price: and advice, 261; and
bankruptcy, 423n; Buffet’s
comments about, 540–41;
calculation of true market, 416;
and comparison of four listed
companies, 330–38, 334n, 337n;
and convertible issues and
warrants, 405, 406, 415, 416;
decline in common stock, 3; of 
Index 613

===== PDF PAGE 628 =====
price (cont.)
delisted stocks, 385n; and
dividends, 490, 491, 494n; and
earnings, 115–16, 318n; and
expectations for investors, 24,
24n, 31, 32; “gambler’s fallacy”
about, 458n; and history and
forecasting of stock market, 65,
69, 70, 71, 73, 74, 77, 78, 81, 83,
84, 84n, 85, 334; and inflation,
61, 62; and investment funds,
238, 239, 241, 250; and investor-
management relations, 487, 488;
and margin of safety, 513, 515n,
516, 517–18, 521, 521n, 522,
522n; and market fluctuations,
17, 23–24, 189–92, 207–12; and
mispricing of stock, 212–13,
363n; and new offerings, 140,
142, 143–44; and portfolio
policy for aggressive investors,
4, 133–44, 136n, 158, 159, 163,
165–69, 171, 172, 174–78, 181,
183; and portfolio policy for
defensive investors, 97, 111–16,
113–14n, 122, 124, 176; and
repurchase plans, 507, 507n,
508n; and risk, 17, 122; and
security analysis, 302–9; and
speculation, 572; of stock
options, 306; and stock selection
for aggressive investors, 378,
382–83, 384, 386, 388, 389, 390,
391; and stock selection for
defensive investors, 338, 347,
348, 349, 350, 350n, 351, 354,
355, 356, 359, 363, 363n, 364,
365, 374–75; and timing, 
189–92; unpredictability of, 24,
24n; and value, 10, 32, 36, 39n,
40, 122, 206, 521, 522, 541;
wholesale, 76, 77. See also
appreciation; bargains;
fluctuations, market; inflation;
price/earnings ratio; specific
company
price-and-wage freeze, 50n
price/earnings ratio: and advice,
264n; and bargains, 168;
calculation of, 159–60n, 374,
374n; and convertible issues
and warrants, 416; definition of,
70n; forward, 374; Graham’s
criticisms of high, 476, 476n;
and growth stocks, 159; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 70, 71, 76, 78; and
investments vs. speculation, 37;
and margin of safety, 514n; and
market fluctuations, 193, 200,
202; and per-share earnings,
321; and portfolio policy for
aggressive investors, 159,
159–60n, 168, 181, 182, 183; and
portfolio policy for defensive
investors, 115, 116, 117n; and
security analysis, 291, 292, 295,
296; and stock selection for
aggressive investors, 382–83,
384, 385, 399; and stock
selection for defensive
investors, 338, 349, 350, 350n,
352–53, 354, 355, 359, 374, 375.
See also specific company
price-to-assets ratio, 349
price-to-book value ratio, 374–75
Priceline.com, 504–5
primary stock issues, 123
pro forma (“as if”) statements, 307,
316n, 322–23, 411, 424n, 431
Procter & Gamble, 289, 305, 351, 373
profitability, 333, 453n. See also
specific measure of profitability
profitable reinvestment theory,
489–92, 490n, 492, 493, 494
ProFunds Ultra OTC Fund, 243–45
ProQuest, 399
prospectus, 252, 437
Providence Bank, 384n
proxy materials, 499n, 500–502,
501n, 510–11
Public Service Commission, 568
Public Service Electric & Gas Co.,
357
614 Index

===== PDF PAGE 629 =====
public utilities: and aggressive
investors, 175, 383n, 389; and
bonds, 286–87; debt of, 348; as
defensive investment, 354,
356–60; and defensive investors,
122, 348, 354, 354n, 356–60,
356n, 362; dividends of, 493,
495–96; and inflation, 54; and
investments vs. speculation, 27;
and market fluctuations, 9, 200;
regulation of, 286n; and security
analysis, 284, 285, 286–87, 300,
304; and selection of stock, 348,
354, 354n, 356–60, 356n, 362,
383n, 389; and subscription
rights, 495–96
Public Utility Holding Company
Act (1935), 286n
Puma Technology, 38
Purex Co., 494
Putnam Growth Fund, 230
QLogic Corp., 370
Quaker Oats, 303
Qualcomm Inc., 14, 41, 41n, 370
quicken.com, 157n, 354n, 375
“quotational” value/loss, 20, 36
quotations, market, 198–99, 203, 204,
205, 206, 221, 222, 223
Qwest Communications, 323–24,
324n
radio companies, 82
railroads, 82, 361, 423; and
aggressive investors, 136, 173,
173n, 174–75; bankruptcy of, 4,
4n, 362, 384, 423n; and bargains,
173, 173n; bonds of, 172, 173,
173n, 174–75, 284, 285, 286, 287,
423, 424, 512; and defensive
investors, 100, 122, 359, 361–62,
362n; and market fluctuations,
4, 4n; and security analysis, 284,
285, 286, 287; and speculation,
570–71. See also specific railroad
Randell, Cort, 235n
Rapid American, 412
Raskob, John J., 1–2, 2n, 534
rating: of bonds, 95, 210, 211, 283n,
350n; of investment funds, 252,
252n
rating agencies, 501n
Reagan, Ronald, 274
real estate, 56, 63, 63n, 203, 360n,
414, 415n, 521
Real Estate Investment Trust
Company, 446–50, 470
Real Estate Investment Trusts
(REITs), 63, 63n, 360n
Realty Equities Corp. of New York,
446–50, 447n, 450n, 470
rebalancing, 104–5, 180n, 197, 219
Red Hat, Inc., 484–85, 484n, 485n
Regions Financial, 373
reinvestment, 172, 179n, 253n; and
defensive investors, 113, 113n,
128, 356n; and dividends,
489–92, 490n, 492, 493, 494; and
margin of safety, 515, 516; and
portfolio for aggressive
investors, 145n, 172, 179n
REITs. See Real Estate Investment
Trusts
repurchase plans, 309, 316n, 506–9,
507n, 508n, 509n, 511
research, 126, 128, 159n, 243, 246,
265n, 272, 363n, 367, 376–77,
379n
research and development (R&D),
305, 316, 440
restructuring charges, 428, 428n
retail bonds, 284
retirement plans, 126–27, 273. See
also pension plans; specific plan
Retirement Systems of Alabama, 146
return: and advice, 272, 275, 277;
aggregate, 27; for aggressive
investors, 29–34, 89, 135, 174,
182, 377, 381, 393; average
annual, 25n, 34, 112n; average
expected, 83, 84; for defensive
investors, 22–29, 25n, 89, 91, 92,
96, 111, 112n, 113, 113n, 121, 122,
176, 368; and Graham’s 
Index 615

===== PDF PAGE 630 =====
return (cont.)
business principles, 523;
Graham’s comments about,
18–34; and Graham’s definition
of investment, 35n; and history
and forecasting of stock market,
67, 78, 80–87; and inflation, 50,
54, 62; and investment vs.
speculation, 18, 19–20n;
measures of, 453n; and public
attitude about stocks, 19–20n;
on Raskob’s prescription, 2; and
risk, 89; and security analysis,
290n; Zweig’s comments about,
35–46. See also dividends;
interest; performance; return on
invested capital (ROIC); yield;
specific company or type of
security
return on invested capital (ROIC),
398, 399
revenue bonds, 94
Riley, Pat, 101
risk: and advice, 264n; and
aggressive investors, 32, 133n,
134n, 136–37, 145, 146, 159n,
160, 163, 174–75, 377, 392–93;
Buffett’s comments about,
546–47; and defensive investors,
89, 96n, 102–4, 106n, 107, 110,
112, 114, 114n, 116, 121–22, 124,
125, 367; and factors that
characterize good decisions,
528–29; foolish, 12; and formula
trading, 44, 45; and Graham’s
business principles, 523; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 80–81; and inflation,
47n, 55, 57; and investment vs.
speculation, 20–21, 21n;
managing of, 12–13, 535, 535n;
and margin of safety, 515, 516,
521–22n, 522, 525–26, 528–29;
and market fluctuations, 188,
219; and price, 17, 122; and
return/reward, 89, 546–47; and
security analysis, 283–87; and
short selling, 458n; and
speculation, 571; and value, 122;
what is, 525–26; Zweig’s
comments about, 535. See also
specific company or type of
security
Risk Management Association, 501n
Ritter, Jay, 150
Roche Pharmaceutical Co., 410n
Rockefeller family, 185
Rodriguez, Robert, 397, 400
Rogers, Will, 368
Rohm & Haas, 373
Rosen, Jan M., 224n
Ross, Robert M., 97 DEL
Roth, John, 184
Rothschild, Nathan Mayer, 179
Rothschild family, 33, 33n
roulette, 518–19, 519n
Rouse Corp., 234
Rowan Companies, 370
Royce, Charles, 369, 400
Ruane, Bill, 543, 544, 545
Ruettgers, Michael, 342n
“Rule of 72,” 115n, 298n
“rule of opposites,” 208, 208n
“safety of principle,” 18, 35, 45
safety tests: for bonds, 283–87
San Francisco Real Estate Investors,
447n
Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., 38n, 181
Santa Fe Industries, 384
Santayana, George, 1
savings accounts, 24, 55, 75, 97
savings and loan associations,
360–61, 360n
savings banks, 89, 97
savings bonds, 24, 108–10, 211
Saxon Industries, 234
Saylor, Michael, 369
SBC Communications, 46, 84, 327
Schilit, Howard, 329
Schloss, Walter J., 541–42, 543–44,
545, 549–50
Schow, Howard, 400
Schultz, Paul, 139n
616 Index

===== PDF PAGE 631 =====
Schwab (Charles A.) Corp., 107
Schweber, Mark, 64
Schwert, William, 42, 42n, 150
Scientific-Atlanta, 370
Scudder, Stevens & Clark, 260
Sears Roebuck Co., 289, 319, 320,
351, 353
SEC. See Securities and Exchange
Commission
secondary companies, 5, 123,
170–73, 172n, 176–78, 196, 196n,
294, 383–84, 520
securities: delivery and receipt of,
267–68, 267–68n
Securities & Exchange Commission
(SEC): and advice, 274; and
AOL-Time Warner case, 443;
and defensive investor, 128; and
GEICO, 533n; and hedge funds,
382n; and investment funds,
226, 226n, 227n, 228n, 236, 250;
and IPOs, 437; and letter-stocks,
3n; and mutual funds, 116; and
new issues, 392; and NVF-
Sharon Steel case, 429n; and
per-share earnings, 324n,
328–29n; and Realty Equities
case, 450n; regulation of
brokerage houses by, 266;
regulation of public utilities by,
286n; and repurchase plans,
508n; and security analysis,
286–87, 286n; and stock
selection for defensive
investors, 369; and Tyco case,
441n; website for, 186, 250, 274,
303, 306–7, 324n, 375, 399, 438n,
510n
Securities Industry Association, 17,
258n
Securities Investor Protection Corp.
(SIPC), 268
security analysis, 330–38; and
advice, 260; for aggressive
investors, 303n, 376–95; and
capital structure, 302, 308–9;
and capitalization, 288;
characteristics of, 282–83; and
comparison of four listed
companies, 330–38, 339–46;
concept of, 280–301; for
defensive investors, 294–95,
347–66; and dividends, 302; and
financial strength, 302, 308–9;
and forecasting, 281, 282n,
288–89, 291n, 293n, 298, 299;
and general long-term
prospects, 302; and growth
stocks, 281, 282, 295–98; and
management, 302; and per-
share earnings, 310–21;
prediction/qualitative
approach to, 364, 364n, 365; and
price, 302–9;
protection/quantitative
approach to, 364, 364n, 365; and
risk, 283–87; and speculation in
common stocks, 572; techniques
for, 281, 282, 282n; and two-part
appraisal process, 321; and
valuation, 281–82; Zweig’s
comments about, 302–9, 339–46.
See also case histories; financial
analysts; per-share earnings;
selection, stock; type of security
Security Analysis (Graham and
Dodd), 18, 35n, 283, 423, 484n,
499n, 508n, 514n, 537, 548, 564
security analyst. See financial
analysts
selection, stock: and adoption of
schemes by large numbers of
people, 195n; and advice, 272;
for aggressive investors, 30–31,
376–95; and bargain issues,
390–93; and “best” stocks in
DJIA, 363; and bridge player
analogy, 378–79; “buy what you
know,” 125–27, 126n; criteria
for, 337–38, 348–66, 385–86; for
defensive investors, 337–38,
347–75, 385n; do it yourself,
128–29; Graham-Newman
methods for, 380–83; Graham’s 
Index 617

===== PDF PAGE 632 =====
selection, stock (cont.)
comments about, 349–50,
376–95; Graham’s criteria for,
369, 371, 374–75; “human
factor” in, 365; for long- and
short-term, 30, 31; and low-
multiplier industrial stocks,
387–90; and market
fluctuations, 200, 206; “pick the
winners,” 76; and practicing
selecting stocks, 396–97;
prediction/qualitative
approach to, 364, 364n, 365;
protection/quantitative
approach to, 347–48, 364, 364n,
365; rules for common stock,
114–15, 117; and secondary
companies, 383–84; single
criteria for, 387–90; and special
situations, 393–95; and stock-
picking “systems,” 37; Zweig’s
comments about, 367–75. See
also asset allocation;
diversification; security analysis
Sequoia Fund, 254, 254n, 543, 553
shareholders. See Investors
Sharon Steel Co., 411, 429–33, 429n,
576–77
sheepish behavior, 247, 498
Shiller, Robert, 85–86
shorting, 19, 30, 32, 32n, 381n,
458n
Siebel Systems, 370
Siegel, Jeremy, 2n, 47n, 80, 82, 85n,
475
Siegel, Laurence, 60n
Sigma-Aldrich, 373
Sing, Jeanette, 478
size of enterprise, 337, 348, 349, 350,
369, 386, 388, 389, 390, 499
Slovic, Paul, 529
Small Business Administration, 
447
small-cap stocks, 252, 369
Smith, Adam, 541–42
South Sea Co., 13
Southern California Edison, 357
Southern New England Telephone,
327
Southwest Airlines, 368
Spalding United Kingdom, 315
special charges, 311, 312–14, 315,
316, 317, 319, 320, 416, 424. See
also specific company
“Special Purpose Entities,” 
316–17n
special situations. See “workouts”
speculation: and advice, 260, 262–63,
268, 269, 563; and aggressive
investors, 141n, 143, 160, 165,
171, 175, 392; and bargains, 171;
benefits of, 21n; and case
histories, 433–37; and
convertible issues and
warrants, 406, 409; and
defensive investors, 89, 112, 115,
116, 119, 128; and dividends,
489, 490; expectations from,
24–34; Graham’s comments
about, 18–34, 563–64; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 74, 85, 87; and inflation,
47; intelligent, 21; investing
distinguished from, 1–2, 10,
18–34, 35–46, 205–6, 519–20; and
investment funds, 5, 229, 232,
233, 237; and margin of safety,
519–20, 521, 522n; and market
fluctuations, 5, 188, 189, 190–91,
193, 199; and new offerings,
141n, 143, 392; and problems of
brokerage houses, 267; and
Raskob’s prescription, 2; and
role of investment bankers, 268;
and security analysis, 294;
Zweig’s comments about, 
35–46
Spinoza, Baruch, 195
splits, stock, 309, 344, 491, 492–96,
493n
Sprint Corp., 497, 509
stability, 178, 348, 349, 371, 386. See
also volatility
stagflation, 59
618 Index

===== PDF PAGE 633 =====
stamps, rare, 56
Standard & Poor’s: and advice, 260;
and bargains, 169, 171; bond
ratings by, 95, 423; and
convertible issues and
warrants, 403, 406n, 408n, 419;
and dividends, 294n; and
expectations for investors, 27n,
28, 28n; and Graham’s disciples,
537–38, 543, 544, 546; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 65–72, 76, 77, 84, 85;
and inflation, 50; and
investment funds, 231, 231n,
233, 235, 237, 239, 250, 254, 255;
and investment vs. speculation,
37; listing of constituent
companies in, 250, 333; and
market fluctuations, 190n,
192–94, 209, 212, 218; and May
1970 debacle, 463n; and mutual
funds, 230, 290n; and portfolio
for aggressive investors, 158,
161, 169, 171; and portfolio for
defensive investors, 111, 112n,
115n, 131, 131n, 132; and
price/earnings ratio, 70n; price
record from, 406; as rating
agency, 501n; and “second-line
companies,” 196, 196n; and
security analysis, 290n, 294n,
299; and stock selection for
aggressive investors, 202, 377,
379n, 383–87, 388, 389, 390, 397;
and stock selection for
defensive investors, 350n, 354,
354n, 359, 360, 361, 362, 369,
371, 374–75; and technology
companies, 578; website for,
129n, 196n, 250. See also Stock
Guide; specific company
Standard Oil, 185
Standard Oil of California, 168–69,
289, 292, 350, 351, 353
Standard Oil of New Jersey, 289, 292,
351, 353, 429
Stanley Works, 373
Starbucks, 126
state bonds, 24, 95, 259, 520
Staunton, Mike, 113n
steel industry, 167, 379, 383
stock: alternatives to, 15; “delisting”
of, 385n; direct purchase of,
128–29; good and bad, 521n;
mental value of, 474; and
portfolio for defensive
investors, 103, 104, 105; public
attitude about, 19–20, 19–20n;
turnover rate of, 37, 38, 247,
266–67; “watered,” 312n. See
also common stock; preferred
stock; specific stock or sector of
stock
stock/equity ratio, 285
Stock Guide (Standard & Poor’s), 
144, 169, 354, 383–87, 388, 
389, 391, 403, 433, 463, 575–76,
578
stock market: and “beating the
pros,” 217–20, 217n; books
about, 80–81; in China, 437n;
easy ways to make money in,
195n; as going wrong, 202–3;
history and forecasting of, 1, 2,
10, 24n, 54, 54n, 65–79, 80–87;
1972 level in, 72–79; structure
of, 573–74; total value of U.S.,
84. See also financial market
stockbrokers. See brokerage houses
stockholders. See investors
Streisand, Barbra, 39, 39n, 126
Strong Corporate Bond Fund, 146
Stryker Corp., 482–83
Studebaker-Worthington Corp.,
412–13
subscription rights, 495–96, 495n
Sullivan, Erin, 245–46
Sun Microsystems, 181, 182, 183, 375
Superior Oil, 490–91, 491n
Supervalu Inc., 373
“sure things,” 15–17, 371, 521–22n
Swift & Co., 289, 351, 353, 354, 355
Sycamore Networks, Inc., 304
Sysco Corp., 473–75
Index 619

===== PDF PAGE 634 =====
T. Rowe Price, 105, 107, 148n, 251,
369
takeovers, 429–33, 429n, 487–88,
487–88n. See also specific
company
tangible-asset value. See book value
Target Corp., 373
taxes: and aggressive investors, 134,
149, 149n, 155, 180n, 398; on
corporations, 99, 99n, 177; and
defensive investors, 91–96, 96n,
99, 99n, 100, 106, 106n, 108, 109,
110, 129, 363n; on dividends, 99,
294n, 493, 495–96, 496n, 507n,
561, 562; and expectations for
investors, 23–25, 27, 34; and
history and forecasting of stock
market, 75; important rules
concerning, 561–62; and
inflation, 50, 54, 63–64; and
interest, 99n, 100, 561, 562; and
investor-management relations,
497; and losses, 561, 562; and
margin of safety, 520; and
market fluctuations, 207–12,
219, 224, 224n; and per-share
earnings, 314, 316, 318, 318n,
324n; of regulated investment
companies, 561–62; and
repurchase plans, 507, 509; and
security analysis, 284, 285, 294n,
305; and stock options, 509,
509n. See also specific company
TCW, 245
“technical approaches,” 2–3
technology stocks: and aggressive
investors, 30, 172n, 173n, 187,
383n; and convertible issues
and warrants, 411n; and
defensive investors, 126n, 369;
and dividends, 490n; in
investment funds, 243; and
investments vs. speculation, 37;
and investor-management
relations, 503, 507; and margin
of safety, 521–22n; and market
fluctuations, 215; and risk, 12;
and security analysis, 291n, 299;
as “sure things,” 15. See also
specific company
Teco Energy, 373
telecommunications stocks, 81, 215,
291n, 369, 383n, 437n, 521–22n
Teleprompter Corp., 234
television, financial, 258n
Telex Corp., 234
Tellabs Inc., 370
Temco Services, 40
Tenneco, 458n
Texaco, 187, 289, 292, 351, 353
Texas Instruments, 116, 116n, 490
Third Avenue Funds, 369, 400
3Com, 479–80
3M Co., 305, 372, 568
Thurlow Growth Fund, 243–45
TIAA-CREF, 110, 111n
ticker symbols, 40, 40n
Ticketmaster Online, 40
Tillinghast, Joel, 400
Time Warner Inc, 442–43. See also
AOL Time Warner
timing, 156–57, 179–80, 179n, 189–92,
206
TIPS. See Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities
Tomlinson, Lucile, 118
Torray (Robert) Fund, 251, 397, 400
Toys “R” Us, Inc., 444, 445
tracking stocks, 396–97
trade names. See brand names
trades: costs of, 318n, 363n, 379n,
385n; of delisted stocks, 385n;
size of, 247; volume of, 266–68
trading: insider, 479n
“trading in the market,” 30
Trane Co., 316
Transamerica Premier Equity Fund,
245
Treasury Inflation-Protected
Securities (TIPS), 26n, 63–64,
63n, 211n
Tri-Continental Corp., 417
Tricon Global Restaurants, Inc., 477n
trust companies, 29, 270, 360n
620 Index

===== PDF PAGE 635 =====
trust funds, 4, 47, 89, 231, 232, 235,
258–59, 259n
Tversky, Amos, 151, 221
Tweedy Browne Partners, 397, 542,
543–44, 551
two-part appraisal process, 299–301,
321
Tyco International Ltd., 14, 303,
410n, 426n, 440–42, 442n, 497
Ulysses (mythological figure),
535–36
uncertainty, 535
undervaluation, 261, 508n; and
aggressive investors, 13–14, 32,
34, 167, 170, 172–73, 175, 382,
400; and bargains, 167, 170,
172–73; Buffet’s comments
about, 537; and margin of
safety, 517–18, 520
underwriting, 268–70, 434–35, 518.
See also specific company or
underwriter
Union Carbide Co., 289, 351, 353
Union Pacific Railroad, 362n
Union Underwear, 317n
unit investment trusts, 226n
United Accum., 230
United Aircraft Co., 289, 351, 353
“units,” 414n
Universal Marion Co., 393, 394, 395
University of Michigan, 19–20n
unpopular large companies, 163–66,
168, 183
Updegrave, Walter, 111n, 219
U.S. Bancorp, 373
U.S. bonds (other than savings), 24,
94–95, 96, 119
U.S. savings bonds, 92, 93–94, 95,
118, 119, 120, 121, 188, 210, 211,
241, 520
U.S. Steel Corp., 289, 351, 353, 384
U.S. Treasury, 110, 496
U.S. Treasury bonds, 63, 94, 106n,
107, 108–9, 111, 112n, 147, 250,
419
U.S. Treasury certificates, 94–95
U.S. treasury securities, 107, 
108–9
U.S. Utilities Sector Index Fund,
356n
USA Interactive, 307
USG Corp., 175n
UST Inc., 216, 368
VA Linux, 152–54
Value Line (investment service), 186,
288, 341, 342, 343
value/valuation: and advice, 259,
261, 274; and aggressive
investors, 32, 33, 137, 166, 167,
177, 178, 380n, 391n; and
bargains, 166, 167, 177, 178;
Buffet’s comments about,
540–41; business vs. stock-
market, 198–207; and dealings
with brokerage houses, 267; and
defensive investors, 22–23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 120, 122, 125, 364;
dependability of, 318n, 321; and
“enhancing shareholder value,”
309; financial analysts as
creating, 568; and history and
forecasting of stock market, 74,
83, 87; importance of, 533;
inflated, 267; and inflation, 54,
58; and investment funds, 238,
239, 241, 245; and investor-
management relations, 498n;
and margin of safety, 520, 521,
522; and per-share earnings,
318, 318n, 320; and price, 10, 32,
36, 39n, 40, 122, 206, 521, 522,
541; and problems of brokerage
houses, 267; “quotational,” 20,
36; and repurchase plans, 507;
and risk, 122; and security
analysis, 281–82, 285, 288–90,
294, 295–98, 300; and selection
of stock, 364, 380n, 391n; and
speculation, 569; and stock
splits, 493n; and two-part
appraisal process, 299–301. 
See also earnings; fluctuations, 
Index 621

===== PDF PAGE 636 =====
value/valuation (cont.)
market; overvaluation;
price/earnings ratio;
undervaluation; specific company
or type of security
Van Wagoner Funds, 243–45
Vanguard Group, 63, 64, 107, 
110, 132, 248, 249, 251, 369, 
400, 420, 420n, 510
Veres, Robert, 259n, 276n,
278
VF Corp., 373
video game, financial, 38–41
Vilar, Alberto, 16
Vinik, Jeffrey, 37
vodka-and-burrito portfolio, 
148
volatility, 245, 356n, 406n, 420n, 509,
509n. See also stability
volume: trading, 312n
Volvo, 250
Wal-Mart Stores, 185, 247, 373
Walgreen Co., 373
Walker, Rob, 323n
Wall Street: reform of, 437
Wall Street Journal, 30, 81, 186, 310,
317, 397
Walton, Sam, 185
Warner-Lambert Co., 167n
warrants, 3, 3n, 134, 311, 316, 318,
403, 403n, 406, 411, 412, 413–21,
413n, 414n, 522, 522n. See also
specific company
Wasatch, 251
Washington Mutual, 375
Washington Post Co., 217, 401,
545–46, 547, 558
Wasserstein Perella, 478
“watered” stock, 312n
Watson, T. L., Sr., 566
Webvan, 505
Welles, C., 235–36
West Point Pepperell, 391, 
392
Westinghouse Corp., 351, 
353
Westinghouse Electric Co., 
289
Wheelabrator-Frye, 469n
Whiting Corp., 467–69, 469n,
470
Whitman, Martin, 400
Wiesenberger Financial Services,
158, 230, 239, 241
Willcox & Gibbs, 467–69, 469n,
470
Williams, Jackie G., 433–34, 433n,
436
Williams Communications, 
304
Wilshire indexes, 27–28n, 215, 216,
243–45
Winstar Communications, 81
wireless stocks, 172n
Woolworth Company (F. W.), 289,
351, 354, 355, 569
working capital: and aggressive
investors, 166, 169, 169n1, 170,
186, 381, 382, 385, 387–93, 391n;
and defensive investors, 348,
356, 369, 370, 371; and
dividends, 492; and security
analysis, 281
“workouts,” 155, 156, 174–75,
393–95, 522
WorldCom, 14, 127, 146–47, 
303, 304n, 423n, 426n, 429n,
497
Worthington Steel, 368
W. R. Grace, 175n
Wyeth, 455n
Xerox Corp., 14, 199, 295, 297, 392,
456
Xilinx Inc, 370
Y2K bug, 342–43n
Yahoo! Inc., 213, 475–77, 476n
yield: and aggressive investors, 
134, 135, 136–37, 138, 394; 
and convertible issues and
warrants, 404, 404n, 411–12; 
and defensive investors, 26, 
622 Index

===== PDF PAGE 637 =====
89, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 
107, 110, 113, 113–14n, 124,
125, 350; fluctuations in, 193,
207–12; and history and
forecasting of stock market, 
71, 77, 78; and inflation, 57; 
and speculation, 573. See also
dividends; interest;
performance; return; type of
security
Yum! Brands, Inc., 475–77, 
477n
Zenith Radio, 335
Ziv, Amir, 506, 506n
ZZZZ Best, 433–34n
Index 623

===== PDF PAGE 638 =====
About the Authors
BENJAMIN GRAHAM (1894-1976), the father of value investing,
has been an inspiration for many of today’s most successful
businesspeople. He is also the author of Securities Analysis and
The Interpretation of Financial Statements.
JASON ZWEIG is a senior writer at Money magazine, a guest
columnist at Time, and a trustee of the Museum of American
Financial History. Formerly a senior editor at Forbes, he has
written about investing since 1987.

===== PDF PAGE 639 =====
Credits
Cover design by mucca design
Interior Designed by Nancy Singer Olaguera

===== PDF PAGE 640 =====
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint:
“The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville,” by W arren E.
Buffett, from the Fall 1984 issue of Hermes, Magazine of Columbia
Business School. Reprinted by permission of Hermes, Magazines of
Columbia Business School, copyright © 1984 The Trustees of Columbia
University and Warren E. Buffett.
“Benjamin Graham,” by Warren E. Buffett, from the
November/December 1976 issue of Financial Analyst Journal .
Reprinted by permission of Financial Analysts Federation.
T HE INTELLIGENT INVESTOR—Revised Edition. Copyright © 1973 by
Benjamin Graham. New material: Copyright © 2003 by Jason Zweig. All
rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this
e-book on-screen.  No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by
any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
PerfectBound™.
PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks of
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Adob eAcrobat eBook  Reader  June  2003  eISBN  0-06-058328-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
