===== SOURCE CHAPTER 1 | PDF PAGES 23-64 =====

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
CHAPTER 1 
Definitions 
The successful implementation of various investment strategies necessitates a sound 
working knowledge of the fundamentals of options and option trading. The option 
strategist must be familiar with a wide range of the basic aspects of stock options 
how the price of an option behaves under certain conditions or how the markets 
function. A thorough understanding of the rudiments and of the strategies helps the 
investor who is not familiar with options to decide not only whether a strategy seems 
desirable, but also - and more important - whether it is suitable. Determining suit­
ability is nothing new to stock market investors, for stocks themselves are not suitable 
for every investor. For example, if the investor's primary objectives are income and 
safety of principal, then bonds, rather than stocks, would be more suitable. The need 
to assess the suitability of options is especially important: Option buyers can lose their 
entire investment in a short time, and uncovered option writers may be subjected to 
large financial risks. Despite follow-up methods designed to limit risk, the individual 
investor must decide whether option trading is suitable for his or her financial situa­
tion and investment objective. 
ELEMENTARY DEFINITIONS 
A stock option is the right to buy or sell a particular stock at a certain price for a lim­
ited period of time. The stock in question is called the underlying security. A call 
option gives the owner ( or holder) the right to buy the underlying security, while a 
put option gives the holder the right to sell the underlying security. The price at 
which the stock may be bought or sold is the exercise price, also called the striking 
price. (In the listed options market, "exercise price" and "striking price" are synony­
mous.) A stock option affords this right to buy or sell for only a limited period of time; 
3 

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
4 Part I: Basic Properties of Stodc Options 
thus, each option has an expiration date. Throughout the book, the term "options" is 
always understood to mean listed options, that is, options traded on national option 
exchanges where a secondary market exists. Unless specifically mentioned, over-the­
counter options are not included in any discussion. 
DESCRIBING OPTIONS 
Four specifications uniquely describe any option contract: 
1. the type (put or call), 
2. the underlying stock name, 
3. the expiration date, and 
4. the striking price. 
As an example, an option referred to as an "XYZ July 50 call" is an option to buy (a 
call) 100 shares (normally) of the underlying XYZ stock for $50 per share. The option 
expires in July. The price of a listed option is quo!_ed on a per-share basis, regardless 
of how many shares of stock can be bought with the option. Thus, if the price of the 
XYZ July 50 call is quoted at $5, buying the option would ordinarily cost $500 ($5 x 
100 shares), plus commissions. 
THE VALUE OF OPTIONS 
An option is a "wasting" asset; that is, it has only an initial value that declines (or 
"wastes" away) as time passes. It may even expire worthless, or the holder may have 
to exercise it in order to recover some value before expiration. Of course, the holder 
may sell the option in the listed option market before expiration. 
An option is also a security by itself, but it is a derivative security. The option is 
irrevocably linked to the underlying stock; its price fluctuates as the price of the 
underlying stock rises or falls. Splits and stock dividends in the underlying stock 
affect the terms of listed options, although cash dividends do not. The holder of a call 
does not receive any cash dividends paid by the underlying stock. 
STANDARDIZATION 
The listed option exchanges have standardized the terms of option contracts. The 
terms of an option constitute the collective name that includes all of the four descrip­
tive specifications. While the type (put or call) and the underlying stock are self-evi­
dent and essentially standardized, the striking price and expiration date require more 
explanation. 

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Chapter 1: Definitions s 
Striking Price. Striking prices are generally spaced 5 points apart for stocks, 
although for more expensive stocks, the striking prices may be 10 points apart. 
A $35 stock might, for example, have options with striking prices, or "strikes," of 
30, 35, and 40, while a $255 stock might have one at 250 and one at 260. 
Moreover, some stocks have striking prices that are 2½ points apart - generally 
those selling for less than $35 per share. That is, a $17 stock might have strikes 
at 15, 17½, and 20. 
These striking price guidelines are not ironclad, however. Exchange officials 
may alter the intervals to improve depth and liquidity, perhaps spacing the strikes 5 
points apart on a nonvolatile stock even if it is selling for more than $100. For exam­
ple, if a $155 stock were very active, and possibly not volatile, then there might well 
be a strike at 155, in addition to those at 150 and 160. 
Expiration Dates. Options have expiration dates in one of three fixed cycles: 
L the January/April/July/October cycle, 
2. the February/May/August/November cycle, or 
3. the March/June/September/December cycle. 
In addition, the two nearest months have listed options as well. However, at any given 
time, the longest-term expiration dates are normally no farther away than 9 months. 
Longer-term options, called LEAPS, are available on some stocks (see Chapter 25). 
Hence, in any cycle, options may expire in 3 of the 4 major months (series) plus the 
near-term months. For example, on February 1 of any year, XYZ options may expire 
in February, March, April, July, and October - not in January. The February option 
( the closest series) is the short- or near-term option; and the October, the far- or long­
term option. If there were LEAPS options on this stock, they would expire in January 
of the following year and in January of the year after that. 
The exact date of expiration is fixed within each month. The last trading day for 
an option is the third Friday in the expiration month. Although the option actually 
does not expire until the following day (the Saturday following), a public customer 
must invoke the right to buy or sell stock by notifying his broker by 5:30 P.M., New 
York time, on the last day of trading. 
THE OPTION ITSELF: OTHER DEFINITIONS 
Classes and Series. A class of options refers to all put and call contracts on the 
same underlying security. For instance, all IBM options - all the puts and calls at 
various strikes and expiration months - form one class. A series, a subset of a class, 

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
6 Part I: Basic Properties of Stock Options 
consists of all contracts of the same class (IBM, for example) having the same expi­
ration date and striking price. 
Opening and Closing Transactions. An opening transaction is the ini­
tial transaction, either a buy or a sell. For example, an opening buy transaction 
creates or increases a long position in the customer's account. A closing trans­
action reduces the customer's position. Opening buys are often followed by clos­
ing sales; correspondingly, opening sells often precede closing buy trades. 
Open Interest. The option exchanges keep track of the number of opening 
and closing transactions in each option series. This is called the open interest. 
Each opening transaction adds to the open interest and each closing transaction 
decreases the open interest. The open interest is expressed in number of option 
contracts, so that one order to buy 5 calls opening would increase the open 
interest by 5. Note that the open interest does not differentiate between buyers 
and sellers - there is no way to tell if there is a preponderance of either one. 
While the magnitude of the open interest is not an extremely important piece of 
data for the investor, it is useful in determining the liquidity of the option in 
question. If there is a large open interest, then there should be little problem in 
making fairly large trades. However, if the open interest is small - only a few 
hundred contracts outstanding - then there might not be a reasonable second­
ary market in that option series. 
The Holder and Writer. Anyone who buys an option as the initial transac­
tion - that is, buys opening - is called the holder. On the other hand, the 
investor who sells an option as the initial transaction - an opening sale - is called 
the writer of the option. Commonly, the writer ( or seller) of an option is referred 
to as being short the option contract. The term "writer" dates back to the over­
the-counter days, when a direct link existed between buyers and sellers of 
options; at that time, the seller was the writer of a new contract to buy stock. In 
the listed option market, however, the issuer of all options is the Options 
Clearing Corporation, and contracts are standardized. This important difference 
makes it possible to break the direct link between the buyer and seller, paving 
the way for the formation of the secondary markets that now exist. 
Exercise and Assignment. An option owner ( or holder) who invokes the 
right to buy or sell is said to exercise the option. Call option holders exercise to 
buy stock; put holders exercise to sell. The holder of most stock options may 
exercise the option at any time after taking possession of it, up until 8:00 P.M. on 

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
O,apter 1: Definitions 7 
the last trading day; the holder does not have to wait until the expiration date 
itself before exercising. (Note: Some options, called "European" exercise 
options, can be exercised only on their expiration date and not before - but they 
are generally not stock options.) These exercise notices are irrevocable; once 
generated, they cannot be recalled. In practical terms, they are processed only 
once a day, after the market closes. Whenever a holder exercises an option, 
somewhere a writer is assigned the obligation to fulfill the terms of the option 
contract: Thus, if a call holder exercises the right to buy, a call writer is assigned 
the obligation to sell; conversely, if a put holder exercises the right to sell, a put 
writer is assigned the obligation to buy. A more detailed description of the exer­
cise and assignment of call options follows later in this chapter; put option exer­
cise and assignment are discussed later in the book. 
RELATIONSHIP OF THE OPTION PRICE AND STOCK PRICE 
In- and Out-of-the-Money. Certain terms describe the relationship between 
the stock price and the option's striking price. A call option is said to be out-of-the­
money if the stock is selling below the striking price of the option. A call option is in­
the-money if the stock price is above the striking price of the option. (Put options 
work in a converse manner, which is described later.) 
Example: XYZ stock is trading at $47 per share. The XYZ July 50 call option is out­
of-the-money, just like the XYZ October 50 call and the XYZ July 60 call. However, 
the XYZ July 45 call, XYZ October 40, and XYZ January 35 are in-the-money. 
The intrinsic value of an in-the-money call is the amount by which the stock 
price exceeds the striking price. If the call is out-of-the-money, its intrinsic value is 
zero. The price that an option sells for is commonly referred to as the premium. The 
premium is distinctly different from the time value premium ( called time premium, 
for short), which is the amount by which the option premium itself exceeds its intrin­
sic value. The time value premium is quickly computed by the following formula for 
an in-the-money call option: 
Call time value premium = Call option price + Striking price - Stock price 
Example: XYZ is trading at 48, and XYZ July 45 call is at 4. The premium - the total 
price - of the option is 4. With XYZ at 48 and the striking price of the option at 45, 
the in-the-money amount (or intrinsic value) is 3 points (48-45), and the time value 
isl(4-3). 

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
8 Part I: Basic Properties ol Stoclc Options 
If the call is out-of-the-money, then the premium and the time value premium 
are the same. 
Example: With XYZ at 48 and an XYZ July 50 call selling at 2, both the premium and 
the time value premium of the call are 2 points. The call has no intrinsic value by 
itself with the stock price below the striking price. 
An option normally has the largest amount of time value premium when the 
stock price is equal to the striking price. As an option becomes deeply in- or out-of­
the-money, the time value premium shrinks substantially. Table 1-1 illustrates this 
effect. Note that the time value premium increases as the stock nears the striking 
price (50) and then decreases as it draws away from 50. 
Parity. An option is said to be trading at parity with the underlying security if 
it is trading for its intrinsic value. Thus, if XYZ is 48 and the xyz July 45 call is 
selling for 3, the call is at parity. A common practice of particular interest to 
option writers ( as shall be seen later) is to refer to the price of an option by relat­
ing how close it is to parity with the common stock. Thus, the XY2 July 45 call 
is said to be a half-point over parity in any of the cases shown in Table 1-2. 
TABLE 1-1. 
Changes in time value premium. 
XYZ Stock XYZ Jul 50 Intrinsic Time Value 
Price Call Price Value Premium 
40 1/2 0 ¼ 
43 1 0 1 
35 2 0 2 
47 4 0 3 
➔50 5 0 5 
53 7 3 4 
55 8 5 3 
57 9 7 2 
60 101/2 10 ¼ 
70 191/2 20 -1/20 
asimplistically, a deeply in-the-money call may actually trade at a discount from intrinsic value, 
because call buyers are more interested in less expensive calls that might return better percentage 
profits on an upward move in the stock. This phenomenon is discussed in more detail when arbitrage 
techniques are examined. 

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
Cl,apter 1: Definitions 9 
TABLE 1-2. 
Comparison of XYZ stock and call prices. 
XYZ July 45 XYZ Stock Over 
Striking Price + Coll Price Price Parity 
(45 + 45 1/2) 1/2 
(45 + 21/2 47 ) 1/2 
(45 + 5 1/2 50 ) ½ 
(45 + 151/2 60 ) 1/2 
FACTORS INFLUENCING THE PRICE OF AN OPTION 
An option's price is the result of properties of both the underlying stock and the terms 
of the option. The major quantifiable factors influencing the price of an option are 
the: 
1.. price of the underlying stock, 
2. striking price of the option itself, 
3. time remaining until expiration of the option, 
4. volatility of the underlying stock, 
5. current risk-free interest rate (such as for 90-day Treasury bills), and 
6. dividend rate of the underlying stock. 
The first four items are the major determinants of an option's price, while the latter 
two are generally less important, although the dividend rate can be influential in the 
case of high-yield stock. 
THE FOUR MAJOR DETERMINANTS 
Probably the most important influence on the option's price is the stock price, 
because if the stock price is far above or far below the striking price, the other fac­
tors have little influence. Its dominance is obvious on the day that an option expires. 
On that day, only the stock price and the striking price of the option determine the 
option's value; the other four factors have no bearing at all. At this time, an option is 
worth only its intrinsic value. 
Example: On the expiration day in July, with no time remaining, an XYZ July 50 call 
has the value shown in Table 1-3; each value depends on the stock price at the time. 

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
10 Part I: Basic Properties of Stock Options 
TABLE 1-3. 
XYZ option's values on the expiration day. 
XYZ July 50 Coll 
(Intrinsic) Value 
XYZ Stock Price ot Expiration 
40 
45 
48 
50 
52 
55 
60 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
5 
10 
The Call Option Price Curve. The call option price curve is a curve that 
plots the prices of an option against various stock prices. Figure 1-1 shows the 
axes needed to graph such a curve. The vertical axis is called Option Price. The 
horizontal axis is for Stock Price. This figure is a graph of the intrinsic value. 
When the option is either out-of-the-money or equal to the stock price, the 
intrinsic value is zero. Once the stock price passes the striking price, it reflects 
the increase of intrinsic value as the stock price goes up. Since a call is usually 
worth at least its intrinsic value at any time, the graph thus represents the min­
imum price that a call may be worth. 
FIGURE 1-1. 
The value of an option at expiration, its intrinsic value. 
~ 
it 
C: 
.Q 
15.. 
0 The intrinsic value line 
bends at the 
st~iking ~ 
pnce. ~ 
Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
Chapter 1: Definitions 11 
When a call has time remaining to its expiration date, its total price consists of 
its intrinsic value plus its time value premium. The resultant call option price curve 
takes the form of an inverted arch that stretches along the stock price axis. If one 
plots the data from Table 1-4 on the grid supplied in Figure 1-2, the curve assumes 
two characteristics: 
1. The time value premium ( the shaded area) is greatest when the stock price and 
the striking price are the same. 
2. When the stock price is far above or far below the striking price (near the ends 
of the curve), the option sells for nearly its intrinsic value. As a result, the curve 
nearly touches the intrinsic value line at either end. [Figure 1-2 thus shows both 
the intrinsic value and the option price curve.] 
This curve, however, shows only how one might expect the XYZ July 50 call 
prices to behave with 6 months remaining until expiration. As the time to expiration 
grows shorter, the arched line drops lower and lower, until, on the final day in the life 
of the option, it merges completely with the intrinsic value line. In other words, the 
call is worth only its intrinsic value at expiration. Examine Figure 1-3, which depicts 
three separate XYZ calls. At any given stock price (a fixed point on the stock price 
scale), the longest-term call sells for the highest price and the nearest-term call sells 
for the lowest price. At the striking price, the actual differences in the three option 
prices are the greatest. Near either end of the scale, the three curves are much clos­
er together, indicating that the actual price differences from one option to another 
are small. For a given stock price, therefore, option prices decrease as the expiration 
date approaches. 
TABLE 1-4. 
The prices of a hypothetical July 50 call with 6 months of time 
remaining, plotted in Figure 1-2. 
XYZ Stock Price 
(Horizontal Axis) 
40 
45 
48 
➔ SO 
52 
55 
60 
XYZ July 50 
Call Price 
(Vertical Axis) 
2 
3 
4 
5 
61/2 
11 
Intrinsic 
Value 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
5 
10 
Time Value 
Premium 
(Shading) 
2 
3 
4 
3 
11/2 
1 

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
12 Part I: Basic Properties of Stock Options 
Example: On January 1st, XYZ is selling at 48. An XYZ July 50 call will sell for more 
than an April 50 call, which in turn will sell for more than a January 50 call. 
FIGURE 1-2. 
Six-month July call option (see Table 1 ·4). 
.g 
a. 
C 
0 
a 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
Greatest 
Value for 
Time Value 
Premium 
0 4 ----------------------
3 
2 
0 
FIGURE 1-3. 
40 45 
represents the option's 
time value premium. 
--------L---------50\ 55 60 
Stock Price Intrinsic value 
remains at zero 
until striking price 
is passed. 
Price Curves for the 3-, 6·, and 9-month call options. 
/ 
Intrinsic Value 
9-Month Curve 
Striking Price 
Stock Price 
As expiration date draws 
closer, the lower curve 
merges with the intrinsic 
value line. The option 
price then equals its 
intrinsic value. 

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
Chapter 1: Definitions 13 
This statement is true no matter what the stock price is. The only reservation is 
that with the stock deeply in- or out-of-the-money, the actual difference between the 
January, April, and July calls will be smaller than with XYZ stock selling at the strik­
ing price of 50. 
Time Value Premium Decay. In Figure 1-3, notice that the price of the 9-
month call is not three times that of the 3-month call. Note next that the curve 
in Figure 1-4 for the decay of time value premium is not straight; that is, the rate 
of decay of an option is not linear. An option's time value premium decays much 
more rapidly in the last few weeks of its life ( that is, in the weeks immediately 
preceding expiration) than it does in the first few weeks of its existence. The rate 
of decay is actually related to the square root of the time remaining. Thus, a 3-
month option decays (loses time value premium) at twice the rate of a 9-month 
option, since the square root of 9 is 3. Similarly, a 2-month option decays at 
twice the rate of a 4-month option (-..f4 = 2). 
This graphic simplification should not lead one to believe that a 9-month option 
necessarily sells for twice the price of a 3-month option, because the other factors 
also influence the actual price relationship between the two calls. Of those other fac­
tors, the volatility of the underlying stock is particularly influential. More volatile 
underlying stocks have higher option prices. This relationship is logical, because if a 
FIGURE 1-4. 
Time value premium decay, assuming the stock price remains con­
stant. 
9 4 
Time Remaining Until Expiration 
(Months) 
0 

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
14 Part I: Basic Properties ol Stodc Options 
stock has the ability to move a relatively large distance upward, buyers of the calls are 
willing to pay higher prices for the calls - and sellers demand them as well. For exam­
ple, if AT&T and Xerox sell for the same price (as they have been known to do), the 
Xerox calls would be more highly priced than the AT&T calls because Xerox is a more 
volatile stock than AT&T. 
The interplay of the four major variables - stock price, striking price, time, and 
volatility can be quite complex. While a rising stock price (for example) is directing 
the price of a call upward, decreasing time may be simultaneously driving the price 
in the opposite direction. Thus, the purchaser of an out-of-the-money call may wind 
up with a loss even after a rise in price by the underlying stock, because time has 
eroded the call value. 
THE TWO MINOR DETERMINANTS 
The Risk-Free Interest Rate. This rate is generally construed as the current 
rate of 90-day Treasury bills. Higher interest rates imply slightly higher option pre­
miums, while lower rates imply lower premiums. Although members of the financial 
community disagree as to the extent that interest rates actually affect option price, 
they remain a factor in most mathematical models used for pricing options. (These 
models are covered much later in this book.) 
The Cash Dividend Rate of the Underlying Stock. Though not clas­
sified as a major determinant in option prices, this rate can be especially impor­
tant to the writer (seller) of an option. If the underlying stock pays no dividends 
at all, then a call option's worth is strictly a function of the other five items. 
Dividends, however, tend to lower call option premiums: The larger the dividend 
of the underlying common stock, the lower the price of its call options. One of 
the most influential factors in keeping option premiums low on high-yielding 
stock is the yield itself. 
Example: XYZ is a relatively low-priced stock with low volatility selling for $25 per 
share. It pays a large annual dividend of $2 per share in four quarterly payments of 
$.50 each. What is a fair price of an XYZ call with striking price 25? 
A prospective buyer of XYZ options is determined to figure out a fair price. In 
six months XYZ will pay $1 per share in dividends, and the stock price will thus be 
reduced by $1 per share when it goes ex-dividend over that time period. In that case, 
if XYZ's price remains unchanged except for the ex-dividend reductions, it will then 
be $24. Moreover, since XYZ is a nonvolatile stock, it may not readily climb back to 
25 after the ex-dividend reductions. Therefore, the call buyer makes a low bid - even 

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
Chapter I: Definitions 15 
for a 6-month call - because the underlying stock's price will be reduced by the ex­
dividend reduction, and the call holder does not receive the cash dividends. 
This particular call buyer calculated the value of the XYZ July 25 call in terms 
of what it was worth with the stock discounted to 24 - not at 25. He knew for certain 
that the stock was going to lose 1 point of value over the next 6 months, provided the 
dividend rate of XYZ stock did not change. In actual practice, option buyers tend to 
discount the upcoming dividends of the stock when they bid for the calls. However, 
not all dividends are discounted fully; usually the nearest dividend is discounted 
more heavily than are dividends to be paid at a later date. The less-volatile stocks with 
the higher dividend payout rates have lower call prices than volatile stocks with low 
payouts. In fact, in certain cases, an impending large dividend payment can substan­
tially increase the probability of an exercise of the call in advance of expiration. (This 
phenomenon is discussed more fully in the following section.) In any case, to one 
degree or another, dividends exert an important influence on the price of some calls. 
OTHER INFLUENCES 
These six factors, major and minor, are only the quantifiable influences on the price 
of an option. In practice, nonquantitative market dynamics - investor sentiment -
can play various roles as well. In a bullish market, call premiums often expand 
because of increased demand. In bearish markets, call premiums may shrink due to 
increased supply or diminished demand. These influences, however, are normally 
short-lived and generally come into play only in dynamic market periods when emo­
tions are running high. 
EXERCISE AND ASSIGNMENT: THE MECHANICS 
The holder of an option can exercise his right at any time during the life of an option: 
Call option holders exercise to buy stock, while put option holders exercise to sell 
stock. In the event that an option is exercised, the writer of an option with the same 
terms is assigned an obligation to fulfill the terms of the option contract. 
EXERCISING THE OPTION 
The actual mechanics of exercise and assignment are fairly simple, due to the role of 
the Options Clearing Corporation (OCC). As the issuer of all listed option contracts, 
it controls all listed option exercises and assignments. Its activities are best explained 
by an example. 

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
16 Part I: Bask Properties ol Stock Options 
Example: The holder of an XYZ January 45 call option wishes to exercise his right to 
buy XYZ stock at $45 per share. He instructs his broker to do so. The broker then 
notifies the administrative section of the brokerage firm that handles such matters. 
The firm then notifies the OCC that they wish to exercise one contract of the XYZ 
January 45 call series. 
Now the OCC takes over the handling. OCC records indicate which member 
(brokerage) firms are short or which have written and not yet covered XYZ Jan 45 
calls. The OCC selects, at random, a member firm that is short at least one XYZ Jan 
45 call, and it notifies the short firm that it has been assigned. That firm must then 
deliver 100 shares of XYZ at $45 per share to the firm that exercised the option. The 
assigned firm, in tum, selects one of its customers who is short the XYZ January 45 
call. This selection for the assignment may be either: 
1. at random, 
2. on a first-in/first-out basis, or 
3. on any other basis that is fair, equitable, and approved by the appropriate 
exchange. 
The selection of the customer who is short the XYZ January 45 completes the 
exercise/assignment process. (If one is an option writer, he should obviously deter­
mine exactly how his brokerage firm assigns its option contracts.) 
HONORING THE ASSIGNMENT 
The assigned customer must deliver the stock - he has no other choice. It is too late 
to try buying the option back in the option market. He must, without fail, deliver 100 
shares of XYZ stock at $45 per share. The assigned writer does, however, have a 
choice as to how to fulfill the assignment. If he happens to be already long 100 shares 
of XYZ in his account, he merely delivers that 100 shares as fulfillment of the assign­
ment notice. Alternatively, he can go into the stock market and buy XYZ at the cur­
rent market price - presumably something higher than $45 - and then deliver the 
newly purchased stock as fulfillment. A third alternative is merely to notify his bro­
kerage firm that he wishes to go short XYZ stock and to ask them to deliver the 100 
shares of XYZ at 45 out of his short account. At times, borrowing stock to go short 
may not be possible, so this third alternative is not always available on every stock. 
Margin Requirements. If the assigned writer purchases stock to fulfill a 
contract, reduced margin requirements generally apply to the transaction, so 
that he would not have to fully margin the purchased stock merely for the pur­
pose of delivery. Generally, the customer only has to pay a day-trade margin of 

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
Oapter 1: Definitions 17 
the difference between the current price of XYZ and the delivery price of $45 
per share. If he goes short to honor the assignment, then he has to fully margin 
the short sale at the current rate for stock sold short on a margin basis. 
AFTER EXERCISING THE OPTION 
The OCC and the customer exercising the option are not concerned with the actual 
method in which the delivery is handled by the assigned customer. They want only to 
ensure that the 100 shares of XYZ at 45 are, in fact, delivered. The holder who exer­
cised the call can keep the stock in his account if he wants to, but he has to margin it 
fully or pay cash in a cash account. On the other hand, he may want to sell the stock 
immediately in the open market, presumably at a higher price than 45. If he has an 
established margin account, he may sell right away without putting out any money. If 
he exercises in a cash account, however, the stock must be paid for in full - even if it 
is subsequently sold on the same day. Alternatively, he may use the delivered stock to 
cover a short sale in his own account if he happens to be short XYZ stock. 
COMMISSIONS 
Both the buyer of the stock via the exercise and the seller of the stock via the assign­
ment are charged a full stock commission on 100 shares, unless a special agreement 
exists between the customer and the brokerage firm. Generally, option holders incur 
higher commission costs through assignment than they do selling the option in the 
secondary market. So the public customer who holds an option is better off selling the 
option in the secondary market than exercising the call. 
Example: XYZ is $55 per share. A public customer owns the XYZ January 45 call 
option. He realizes that exercising the call, buying XYZ at 45, and then immediately 
selling it at 55 in the stock market would net a profit of 10 points - or $1,000. 
However, the combined stock commissions on both the purchase at 45 and the sale 
at 55 might easily exceed $100. The net gain would actually be only $900. 
On the other hand, the XYZ January 45 call is worth (and it would normally sell 
for) at least 10 points in the listed options market. The commission for selling one call 
at a price of 10 is roughly $30. The customer therefore decides to sell his XYZ 
January 45 call in the option market. He receives $1,000 (10 points) for the call and 
pays only $30 in commissions - for a net of $970. The benefit of his decision is obvi­
ous. 
Of course, sometimes a customer wants to own XYZ stock at $45 per share, 
despite the stock commissions. Perhaps the stock is an attractive addition that will 

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
18 Part I: Basic Properties of Stock Options 
bring greater potential to a portfolio. Or if the customer is already short the XYZ 
stock, he is going to have to buy 100 shares and pay the commissions sooner or later 
in any case; so exercising the call at the lower stock price of 45 may be more desir­
able than buying at the current price of 55. 
ANTICIPATING ASSIGNMENT 
The writer of a call often prefers to buy the option back in the secondary market, 
rather than fulfill the obligation via a stock transaction. It should be strJssed again that 
once the writer receives an assignment notice, it is too late to attempt to buy back 
(cover) the call. The writer must buy before assignment, or live up to the terms upon 
assignment. The writer who is aware of the circumstances that generally cause the 
holders to exercise can anticipate assignment with a fair amount of certainty. In antic­
ipation of the assignment, the writer can then close the contract in the secondary mar­
ket. As long as the writer covers the position at any time during a trading day, he can­
not be assigned on that option. Assignment notices are determined on open positions 
as of the close of trading each day. The crucial question then becomes, "How can the 
writer anticipate assignment?" Several circumstances signal assignments: 
1. a call that is in-the-money at expiration, 
2. an option trading at a discount prior to expiration, or 
3. the underlying stock paying a large dividend and about to go ex-dividend. 
Automatic Exercise. Assignment is all but certain if the option is in-the­
money at expiration. Should the stock close even a half-point above the striking 
price on the last day of trading, the holder will exercise to take advantage of the 
half-point rather than let the option expire. Assignment is nearly inevitable even 
if a call is only a few cents in-the-money at expiration. In fact, even if the call 
trades in-the-money at any time during the last trading day, assignment may be 
forthcoming. Even if a holder forgets that he owns an option and fails to exer­
cise, the OCC automatically exercises any call that is ¾-point in-the-money at 
expiration, unless the individual brokerage firm whose customer is long the call 
gives specific instructions not to exercise. This automatic exercise mechanism 
ensures that no investor throws away money through carelessness. 
Example: XYZ closes at 51 on the third Friday of January (the last day of trading for 
the January option series). Since options don't expire until Saturday, the next day, the 
OCC and all brokerage firms have the opportunity to review their records to issue 
assignments and exercises and to see if any options could have been profitably exer-

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
Gapter 1: Definitions 19 
cised but were not. If XYZ closed at 51 and a customer who owned a January 45 call 
option failed to either sell or exercise it, it is automatically exercised. Since it is worth 
$600, this customer stands to receive a substantial amount of money back, even after 
stock commissions. 
In the case of an XYZ January 50 call option, the automatic exercise procedure 
is not as clear-cut with the stock at 51. Though the OCC wants to exercise the call 
automatically, it cannot identify a specific owner. It knows only that one or more XYZ 
January calls are still open on the long side. When the OCC checks with the broker­
age firm, it may find that the firm does not wish to have the XYZ January 50 call exer­
cised automatically, because the customer would lose money on the exercise after 
incurring stock commissions. Yet the OCC must attempt to automatically exercise 
any in-the-money calls, because the holder may have overlooked a long position. 
When the public customer sells a call in the secondary market on the last day of 
trading, the buyer on the other side of the trade is very likely a market-maker. Thus, 
when trading stops, much of the open interest in in-the-money calls held long 
belongs to market-makers. Since they can profitably exercise even for an eighth of a 
point, they do so. Hence, the writer may receive an assignment notice even if the 
stock has been only slightly above the strike price on the last trading day before expi­
ration. 
Any writer who wishes to avoid an assignment notice should always buy back ( or 
cover) the option if it appears the stock will be above the strike at expiration. The 
probabilities of assignment are extremely high if the option expires in-the-money. 
Early Exercise Due to Discount. When options are exercised prior to 
expiration, this is called early, or premature, exercise. The writer can usually 
expect an early exercise when the call is trading at or below parity. A parity or 
discount situation in advance of expiration may mean that an early exercise is 
forthcoming, even if the discount is slight. A writer who does not want to deliv­
er stock should buy back the option prior to expiration if the option is apparently 
going to trade at a discount to parity. The reason is that arbitrageurs (floor 
traders or member firm traders who pay only minimal commissions) can take 
advantage of discount situations. (Arbitrage is discussed in more detail later in 
the text; it is mentioned here to show why early exercise often occurs in a dis­
count situation.) 
Example: XYZ is bid at $50 per share, and an XYZ January 40 call option is offered 
at a discount price of 9.80. The call is actually "worth" 10 points. The arbitrageur can 
take advantage of this situation through the following actions, all on the same day: 

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
20 Part I: Basic Properties ol Stoclc Options 
1. Buy the January 40 call at 9.80. 
2. Sell short XYZ common stock at 50. 
3. Exercise the call to buy XYZ at 40. 
The arbitrageur makes 10 points from the short sale of XYZ (steps 2 and 3), from 
which he deducts the 9.80 points he paid for the call. Thus, his total gain is 20 cents 
- the amount of the discount. Since he pays only a minimal commission, this trans-
action results in a net profit. ' 
Also, if the writer can expect assignment when the option has no time value pre­
mium left in it, then conversely the option will usually not be called if time premium 
is left in it. 
Example: Prior to the expiration date, XYZ is trading at 50½, and the January 50 call 
is trading at 1. The call is not necessarily in imminent danger of being called, since it 
still has half a point of time premium left. 
Time value Call Striking Stock 
= + premium price price price 
= 1 + 50 50½ 
= ½ 
Early Exercise Due to Dividends on the Underlying Stock. Some­
times the market conditions create a discount situation, and sometimes a large 
dividend gives rise to a discount. Since the stock price is almost invariably 
reduced by the amount of the dividend, the option price is also most likely 
reduced after the ex-dividend. Since the holder of a listed option does not receive 
the dividend, he may decide to sell the option in the secondary market before the 
ex-date in anticipation of the drop in price. If enough calls are sold because of 
the impending ex-dividend reduction, the option may come to parity or even to a 
discount. Once again, the arbitrageurs may move in to take advantage of the sit­
uation by buying these calls and exercising them. 
If assigned prior to the ex-date, the writer does not receive the dividend for he 
no longer owns the stock on the ex-date. Furthermore, if he receives an assignment 
notice on the ex-date, he must deliver the stock with the dividend. It is therefore very 
important for the writer to watch for discount situations on the day prior to the ex­
date. 

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
0.,,,,, I: Definitions 21 
A word of caution: Do not conclude from this discussion that a call will be exer­
cised for the dividend if the dividend is larger than the remaining time premium. It 
won't. An example will show why. 
Emmple: XYZ stock, at 50, is going to pay a $1 dividend with the ex-date set for the 
next day. An XYZ January 40 call is selling at 10¼; it has a quarter-point of time pre­
mium. (TVP = 10¼ + 40 - 50 = ¼). The same type of arbitrage will not work 
Suppose that the arbitrageur buys the call at 10¼ and exercises it: He now owns the 
stock for the ex-date, and he plans to sell the stock immediately at the opening on the 
ex-date, the next day. On the ex-date, XYZ opens at 49, because it goes ex-dividend 
by $1. The arbitrageur's transactions thus consist of: 
1. Buy the XYZ January 40 call at 10¼. 
2. Exercise the call the same day to buy XYZ at 40. 
3. On the ex-date, sell XYZ at 49 and collect the $1 dividend. 
He makes 9 points on the stock (steps 2 and 3), and he receives a 1-point dividend, 
for a total cash inflow of 10 points. However, he loses 10¼ points paying for the call. 
The overall transaction is a loser and the arbitrageur would thus not attempt it. 
A dividend payment that exceeds the time premium in the call, therefore, does 
not imply that the writer will be assigned. 
More of a possibility, but a much less certain one, is that the arbitrageur may 
attempt a "risk arbitrage" in such a situation. Risk arbitrage is arbitrage in which the 
arbitrageur runs the risk of a loss in order to try for a profit. The arbitrageur may sus­
pect that the stock will not be discounted the full ex-dividend amount or that the 
call's time premium will increase after the ex-date. In either case (or both), he might 
make a profit: If the stock opens down only 60 cents or if the option premium 
expands by 40 cents, the arbitrageur could profit on the opening. In general, howev­
er, arbitrageurs do not like to take risks and therefore avoid this type of situation. So 
the probability of assignment as the result of a dividend payment on the underlying 
stock is small, unless the call trades at parity or at a discount. 
Of course, the anticipation of an early exercise assumes rational behavior on the 
part of the call holder. If time premium is left in the call, the holder is always better 
off financially to sell that call in the secondary market rather than to exercise it. 
However, the terms of the call contract give a call holder the right to go ahead and 
exercise it anyway - even if exercise is not the profitable thing to do. In such a case, 
a writer would receive an assignment notice quite unexpectedly. Financially unsound 
early exercises do happen, though not often, and an option writer must realize that, 

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
22 Part I: Basic Properties of Stock Options 
in a very small percentage of cases, he could be assigned under very illogical cir­
cumstances. 
THE OPTION MARKETS 
The trader of stocks does not have to become very familiar with the details of the way 
the stock market works in order to make money. Stocks don't expire, nor Cal} an 
investor be pulled out of his investment unexpectedly. However, the option trader is 
required to do more homework regarding the operation of the option markets. In 
fact, the option strategist who does not know the details of the working of the option 
markets will likely find that he or she eventually loses some money due to ignorance. 
MARKET-MAKERS 
In at least one respect, stock and listed option markets are similar. Stock markets use 
specialists to do two things: First, they are required to make a market in a stock by 
buying and selling from their own inventory, when public orders to buy or sell the 
stock are absent. Second, they keep the public book of orders, consisting of limit 
orders to buy and sell, as well as stop orders placed by the public. When listed option 
trading began, the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) introduced a similar 
method of trading, the market-maker and the board broker system. The CBOE 
assigns several market-makers to each optionable stock to provide bids and offers to 
buy and sell options in the absence of public orders. Market-makers cannot handle 
public orders; they buy and sell for their own accounts only. A separate person, the 
board broker, keeps the book of limit orders. The board broker, who cannot do any 
trading, opens the book for traders to see how many orders to buy and sell are placed 
nearest to the current market (consisting of the highest bid and lowest offer). (The 
specialist on the stock exchange keeps a more closed book; he is not required to for­
mally disclose the sizes and prices of the public orders.) 
In theory, the CBOE system is more efficient than the stock exchange system. 
With several market-makers competing to create the market in a particular security, 
the market should be a more efficient one than a single specialist can provide. Also, 
the somewhat open book of public orders should provide a more orderly market. In 
practice, whether the CBOE has a more efficient market is usually a subject for heat­
ed discussion. The strategist need not be concerned with the question. 
The American Stock Exchange uses specialists for its option trading, but it also 
has floor traders who function similarly to market-makers. The regional option 
exchanges use combinations of the two systems; some use market-makers, while oth­
ers use specialists. 

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
Cl,apter 1: Definitions 23 
OPTION SYMBOLOGY 
It is probably a good idea for an option trader to understand how option symbols are 
created and used, for it may prove to be useful information. If one has a sophisticat­
ed option quoting and pricing system, the quote vendor will usually provide the 
translation between option symbols and their meanings. The free option quote sec­
tion on the CBOE's Web site, www.cboe.com, can be useful for that purpose as well. 
Even with those aids, it is important that an option trader understand the concepts 
surrounding option symbology. 
THE OPTION BASE SYMBOL 
The basic option symbol consists of three parts: 
Option symbol = Base symbol + Expiration month code + Striking price code 
The base symbol is never more than three characters in length. In its simplest form, 
the base symbol is the same as the stock symbol. That works well for stocks with three 
or fewer letters in their symbol, such as General Electric (GE) or IBM (IBM), but 
what about NASDAQ stocks? For NASDAQ stocks, the OCC makes up a three-let­
ter symbol that is used to denote options on the stock. A few examples are: 
Stock 
Cisco 
Microsoft 
Qualcomm 
Stock Symbol 
csco 
MSFT 
QCOM 
Option Base Symbol 
CYQ 
MSQ 
QAQ 
In the three examples, there is a letter "Q" in each of the option base symbols. 
However, that is not always the case. The option base symbol assigned by the OCC 
for a NASDAQ stock may contain any three letters (or, rarely, only two letters). 
THE EXPIRATION MONTH CODE 
The next part of an option symbol is the expiration month code, which is a one-char­
acter symbol. The symbology that has been created actually uses the expiration 
month code for two purposes: (1) to identify the expiration month of the option, and 
(2) to designate whether the option is a call or a put. 
The concept is generally rather simple. For call options, the letter A stands for 
January, B for February, and so forth, up through L for December. For put options, 
the letter M stands for January, N for February, and so forth, up through X for 
December. The letters Y and Z are not used for expiration month codes. 

===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
24 Part I: Basic Properties ol Stock Options 
THE STRIKING PRICE CODE 
This is also a one-character symbol, designed to identify the striking price of the 
option. Things can get ve:iy complicated where striking price codes are concerned, 
but simplistically the designations are that the letter A stands for 5, B stands for 10, 
on up to S for 95 and T for 100. If the stock being quoted is more expensive - say, 
trading at $150 per share - then it is possible that A will stand for 105, B for 110, S 
for 195 and T for 200 (although, as will be shown later, a more complicated approach 
might have to be used in cases such as these). It should be noted that the exchanges 
- who designate the striking price codes and their numerical meaning - do not have • 
to adhere to any of the generalized conventions described here. They usually adhere 
to as many of them as they can, in order to keep things somewhat standardized, but 
they can use the letters in any way they want. Typically, they would only use any strik­
ing price code letter outside of its conventional designation after a stock has split or 
perhaps paid a special dividend of some sort. 
Before getting into the more complicated option symbol constructions, let's 
look at a few simple, straightforward examples: 
Stock Stock Symbol Description Option Symbol 
IBM IBM IBM July 125 call IBMGE 
Cisco csco Cisco April 75 put CYQPO 
Ford Motor F Ford March 40 call FCH 
General Motors GM GM December 65 put GMXM 
In each option symbol, the last two characters are the expiration month code and the 
striking price code. Preceding them is the option base symbol. For the IBM July 125, 
the option symbol is quite straightforward. IBM is the option base symbol (as well as 
the stock symbol), G stands for July, and E for 125, in this case. 
For the Cisco April 75 put, the option base symbol is CYQ (this was given in the 
previous table, but if one didn't know what the base symbol was, you would have to 
look it up on the Internet or call a broker). The expiration month code in this case is 
P, because P stands for an April put option. Finally, the striking price code is 0, which 
stands for 75. 
The Ford March 40 call and the GM December 65 put are similar to the oth­
ers, except that the stock symbols only require one and two characters, respectively, 
so the option symbol is thus a shorter symbol as well - first using the stock symbol, 
then the standard character for the expiration month, followed by the standard char­
acter for the striking price. 

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
Chapter 1: Definitions 25 
MORE STRIKING PRICE CODES 
The letters A through T cannot handle all of the possible striking price codes. Recall 
that many stocks, especially lower-priced ones, have striking prices that are spaced 
2½ points apart. In those cases, a special letter designation is usually used for the 
striking price codes: 
Striking Price Code 
u 
V 
w 
X 
y 
z 
Possible Meanings 
7.5 or 37.5 or 67.5 or 97.5 or even 127.5! 
12.5 or 42.5 or 72.5 or 102.5 or 132.5 
17.5 or 47.5 or 77.5 or 107.5 or 137.5 
22.5 or 52.5 or 82.5 or 112.5 or 142.5 
27.5 or 57.5 or 87.5 or 117.5 or 147.5 
32.5 or 62.5 or 92.5 or 122.5 or 152.5 
Typically, only the first or second meaning is used for these letters. The higher-priced 
ones only occur after a very expensive stock splits 2-for-l (say, a stock that had a strike 
price of 155 and split 2-for-l, creating a strike. price of 155 divided by 2, or 77.50). 
WRAPS 
Note that any striking price code can have only one meaning. Thus, if the letter A is 
being used to designate a strike price of 5, and the underlying stock has a tremen­
dous rally to over $100 per share, then the letter A cannot also be used to designate 
the strike price of 105. Something else must be done. In the early years of option 
trading, there was no need for wrap symbols, but in recent - more volatile - times, 
stocks have risen 100 points during the life of an option. 
For example, if XYZ was originally trading at 10, there might be a 9-month, XYZ 
December 10 call. Its symbol would be XYZLB. If, in the course of the next few 
months, XYZ traded up to nearly 110 while the December 10 call was still in exis­
tence, the exchange would want to trade an XYZ December 110 call. But a new let­
ter would have to be designated for any new strikes (A already stands for 5, so it can­
not stand for 105; B already stands for 10, so it cannot stand for 110, etc.). There 
aren't enough letters in the alphabet to handle this, so the exchange creates an addi­
tional option base symbol, called a wrap symbol. 
In this case, the exchange might say that the option base symbol XYA is now 
going to be used to designate strike prices of 105 and higher ( up to 200) for the com­
mon stock whose symbol is XYZ. Having done that, the letter A can be used for 105, 
B for 110, etc. 

===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
26 
Option 
XYZ December 10 call 
XYZ December 110 call 
Part I: Basic Properties ol Stock Options 
Symbol 
XYZLB 
XYALB (wrap symbol is XYA) 
Note that the wrap symbol now allows the usage of Bin its standard interpretati<,n 
once again. 
This process can be extended. Suppose that, by some miracle, this stock rose to 
205 prior to the December expiration. Things like this happened to Yahoo (YHOO), 
Amazon (AMZN), Qualcomm (QCOM), and others during the 1990s. If that hap­
pened, the exchange would now create another wrap symbol and use it to designate 
strike prices from 205 to 300. Suppose XYZ traded up to 210, and the exchange then 
said that YYA would now be the wrap symbol for the higher strikes. In that case, these 
symbols would exist: 
Option 
XYZ December 10 call 
XYZ December 110 call 
XYZ December 210 call 
Symbol 
XYZLB 
XYALB (wrap symbol is XYA) 
YYALB (wrap symbol is YYA) 
Note that there doesn't have to be any particular relationship between the wrap sym­
bols and the stock itself; any three-character designation could be used. 
LEAPS SYMBOLS 
A LEAPS option is one that is very long-term, expiring one or more years hence. 
Consequently, the expiration month codes encounter a problem with LEAPS similar 
to the one seen for striking price codes where wraps are concerned. The letter A 
stands for January as an expiration month code. However, if there is a LEAPS option 
on this same stock, and that LEAPS option expires in January of the next year, the 
letter A cannot be used to designate the expiration month of the LEAPS option, since 
it is already being used for the "standard" option. Consequently, LEAPS options have 
a different base option symbol than the "standard" base option symbol. 
Example: The current year is 2001. The OCC might have designated that, for IBM, 
LEAPS options expiring in the year 2002 will have the option base symbol VBM, and 
those expiring in the year 2003 will have the option base symbol WBM. Thus, the fol­
lowing symbols would be used to describe the designated options: 

===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
Chapter 1: Definitions 
Option Description 
IBM January 125 call (expiring in 2001) 
IBM January 125 call (expiring in 2002) 
IBM January 125 call (expiring in 2003) 
IBM January 125 put (expiring in 2003) 
27 
Option Symbol 
IBMAE 
VBMAE 
WBMAE 
WBMME 
Note that the last line shows a LEAPS put option symbol. The letter M stands for a 
January put option - the standard usage for the expiration month code. 
STOCK SPLITS 
Stock splits often wreak havoc on option symbols, as the exchanges are forced to use 
the standard characters in nonstandard ways in order to accommodate all the addi­
tional strikes that are created when a stock splits. The actual discussion of stock splits 
and the resultant option symbology is deferred to the next section. 
SYMBOLOGY SUMMARY 
The exchanges do a good job of making symbol information available. Each exchange 
has a Web site where memos detailing the changes required by LEAPS, wraps, and 
splits are available for viewing. 
The OCC and the exchanges have been forced to create multiple option base 
symbols for a single stock in order to accommodate the various strike price and expi­
ration month situations - to avoid duplication of the standardized character used for 
the strike or expiration month. This is unwieldy and confusing for option traders and 
for data vendors as well. In some rare cases, mistakes are made, and there can briefly 
be two designations for the same option symbol. The only way to eliminate this con­
fusion would be to use a longer, more descriptive option symbol that included the 
expiration year and the striking price as numerical values, much as is done with 
futures options. It is the member firms themselves and some of the quote vendors 
who object to the transformation to this less confusing system, because they would 
have to recode their software and alter their databases. 
DETAILS OF OPTION TRADING 
The facts that the strategist should be concerned with are included in this section. 
They are not presented in any particular order of importance, and this list is not nec­
essarily complete. Many more details are given in the discussion of specific strategies 
throughout this text. 

===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
28 Part I: Basic Properties of Stock Options 
1. Options expire on the Saturday following the third Friday of the expiration 
rrwnth, although the third Friday is the last day of trading. In general, however, 
waiting past 3:30 P.M. on the last day to place orders to buy or sell the expiring 
options is not advisable. In the "crush" of orders during the final minutes of trad- • 
ing, even a market order may not have enough time to be executed. 
2. Option trades have a one-day settlement cycle. The trade settles on the next busi­
ness day after the trade. Purchases must be paid for in full, and the credits from 
sales "hit" the account on the settlement day. Some brokerage firms require set­
tlement on the same day as the trade, when the trade occurs on the last trading 
day of an expiration series. 
3. Options are opened for trading in rotation. When the underlying stock opens for 
trading on any exchange, regional or national, the options on that stock then go 
into opening rotation on the corresponding option exchange. The rotation system 
also applies if the underlying stock halts trading and then reopens during a trad­
ing day; options on that stock .reopen via a rotation. 
In the rotation itself, interested parties make bids and offers for each particular 
option series one at a time - the XYZ January 45 call, the XYZ January 50 call, 
and so on - until all the puts and calls at various expiration dates and striking 
prices have been opened. Trades do not necessarily have to take place in each 
series, just bids and offers. Orders such as spreads, which involve more than one 
option, are not executed during a rotation. 
While the rotation is taking place, it is possible that the underlying stock could 
make a substantial move. This can result in option prices that seem unrealistic 
when viewed from the perspective of each option's opening. Consequently, the 
opening price of an option can be a somewhat suspicious statistic, since none of 
them open at exactly the same time. 
Also, it should be noted that most option traders do not trade during rotation, so 
a market order may receive a very poor price. Hence, if one is considering trad­
ing during rotation, a limit order should be used. ( Order entry is discussed in 
more detail in a later section of this chapter.) 
4. When the underlying stock splits or pays a stock dividend, the terms of its options 
are adjusted. Such an adjustment may result in fractional striking prices and in 
options for other than 100 shares per contract. No adjustments in terms are made 
for cash dividends. The actual details of splits, stock dividends, and rights offer­
ings, along with their effects on the option terms, are always published by the 
option exchange that trades those options. Notices are sent to all member firms, 
who then make that information available to their brokers for distribution to 
clients. In actual practice, the option strategist should ascertain from the broker 

===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
28 Part I: Bask Properties of Stock Options 
l. Options expire on the Saturday following the third Friday of the expiration 
rrwnth, although the third Friday is the last day of trading. In general, however, 
waiting past 3:30 P.M. on the last day to place orders to buy or sell the expiring 
options is not advisable. In the "crush" of orders during the final minutes of trad- , 
ing, even a market order may not have enough time to be executed. 
2. Option trades have a one-day settlement cycle. The trade settles on the next busi­
ness day after the trade. Purchases must be paid for in full, and the credits from 
sales "hit" the account on the settlement day. Some brokerage firms require set­
tlement on the same day as the trade, when the trade occurs on the last trading 
day of an expiration series. 
3. Options are opened for trading in rotation. When the underlying stock opens for 
trading on any exchange, regional or national, the options on that stock then go 
into opening rotation on the corresponding option exchange. The rotation system 
also applies if the underlying stock halts trading and then reopens during a trad­
ing day; options on that stock reopen via a rotation. 
In the rotation itself, interested parties make bids and offers for each particular 
option series one at a time - the XYZ January 45 call, the XYZ January 50 call, 
and so on - until all the puts and calls at various expiration dates and striking 
prices have been opened. Trades do not necessarily have to take place in each 
series, just bids and offers. Orders such as spreads, which involve more than one 
option, are not executed during a rotation. 
While the rotation is taking place, it is possible that the underlying stock could 
make a substantial move. This can result in option prices that seem unrealistic 
when viewed from the perspective of each option's opening. Consequently, the 
opening price of an option can be a somewhat suspicious statistic, since none of 
them open at exactly the same time. 
Also, it should be noted that most option traders do not trade during rotation, so 
a market order may receive a very poor price. Hence, if one is considering trad­
ing during rotation, a limit order should be used. ( Order entry is discussed in 
more detail in a later section of this chapter.) 
4. When the underlying stock splits or pays a stock dividend, the terms of its options 
are adjusted. Such an adjustment may result in fractional striking prices and in 
options for other than 100 shares per contract. No adjustments in terms are made 
for cash dividends. The actual details of splits, stock dividends, and rights offer­
ings, along with their effects on the option terms, are always published by the 
option exchange that trades those options. Notices are sent to all member firms, 
who then make that information available to their brokers for distribution to 
clients. In actual practice, the option strategist should ascertain from the broker 

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
28 Part I: Basic Properties ol Stock Options 
1. Options expire on the Saturday following the third Friday of the expiration 
month, although the third Friday is the last day of trading. In general, however, 
waiting past 3:30 P.M. on the last day to place orders to buy or sell the expiring 
options is not advisable. In the "crush" of orders during the final minutes of trad- , 
ing, even a market order may not have enough time to be executed. 
2. Option trades have a one-day settlement cycle. The trade settles on the next busi­
ness day after the trade. Purchases must be paid for in full, and the credits from 
sales "hit" the account on the settlement day. Some brokerage firms require set­
tlement on the same day as the trade, when the trade occurs on the last trading 
day of an expiration series. 
3. Options are opened for trading in rotation. When the underlying stock opens for 
trading on any exchange, regional or national, the options on that stock then go 
into opening rotation on the corresponding option exchange. The rotation system 
also applies if the underlying stock halts trading and then reopens during a trad­
ing day; options on that stock reopen via a rotation. 
In the rotation itself, interested parties make bids and offers for each particular 
option series one at a time - the XYZ January 45 call, the XYZ January 50 call, 
and so on - until all the puts and calls at various expiration dates and striking 
prices have been opened. Trades do not necessarily have to take place in each 
series, just bids and offers. Orders such as spreads, which involve more than one 
option, are not executed during a rotation. 
While the rotation is taking place, it is possible that the underlying stock could 
make a substantial move. This can result in option prices that seem unrealistic 
when viewed from the perspective of each option's opening. Consequently, the 
opening price of an option can be a somewhat suspicious statistic, since none of 
them open at exactly the same time. 
Also, it should be noted that most option traders do not trade during rotation, so 
a market order may receive a very poor price. Hence, if one is considering trad­
ing during rotation, a limit order should be used. ( Order entry is discussed in 
more detail in a later section of this chapter.) 
4. When the underlying stock splits or pays a stock dividend, the terms of its options 
are adjusted. Such an adjustment may result in fractional striking prices and in 
options for other than 100 shares per contract. No adjustments in terms are made 
for cash dividends. The actual details of splits, stock dividends, and rights offer­
ings, along with their effects on the option terms, are always published by the 
option exchange that trades those options. Notices are sent to all member firms, 
who then make that information available to their brokers for distribution to 
clients. In actual practice, the option strategist should ascertain from the broker 

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
a.,,., 1: Definitions 29 
the specific terms of the new option series, in case the broker has overlooked the 
information sent. 
E«ample 1: XYZ is a $50 stock with option striking prices of 45, 50, and 60 for the 
January, April, and July series. It declares a 2-for-l stock split. Usually, in a 2-for-l 
split situation, the number of outstanding option contracts is doubled and the strik­
ing prices are halved. The owner of 5 XYZ January 60 calls becomes the owner of 10 
XYZ January 30 calls. Each call is still for 100 shares of the underlying stock. 
If fractional striking prices arise, the exchange also publishes the quote symbol 
that is to be used to find the price of the new option. The XYZ July 45 call has a sym­
bol ofXYZGI: G stands for July and I is for 45. After the 2-for-l split, one July 45 call 
becomes 2 July 22½ calls. The strike of 22½ is assigned a letter. The exchanges usu­
ally attempt to stay with the standard symbols as much as possible, meaning that X 
would be designated for 22½. Hence, the symbol for the XYZ July 22½ call would be 
XYZGX. 
After the split, XYZ has options with strikes of 22½, 25, and 30. In some cases, 
the option exchange officials may introduce another strike if they feel such a strike is 
necessary; in this example, they might introduce a striking price of 20. 
E«ample 2: UVW Corp. is now trading at 40 with strikes of 35, 40, and 45 for the 
January, April, and July series. UVW declares a 2½ percent stock dividend. The con­
tractually standardized 100 shares is adjusted up to 102, and the striking prices are 
reduced by 2 percent (rounded to the nearest eighth). Thus, the "old" 35 strike 
becomes a "new" strike of 343/s: 1.02 divided into 35 equals 34.314, which is 343/s 
when rounded to the nearest eighth. The "old" 40 strike becomes a "new" strike of 
39¼, and the "old" 45 strike becomes 441/s. Since these new strikes are all fraction­
al, they are given special symbols - probably U, V, and W. Thus, the "old" symbol 
UVWDH (UVW April 40) becomes the "new" symbol UVWDV (UVW April 39¼). 
After the split, the exchange usually opens for trading new strikes of 35, 40, and 
45 - each for 100 shares of the underlying stock. For a while, there are six striking 
prices for UVW options. As time passes, the fractional strikes are eliminated as they 
expire. Since they are not reintroduced, they eventually disappear as long as UVW 
does not issue further stock dividends. 
Example 3: WWW Corp. (symbol WWW) is trading at $120 per share, with strike 
prices of ll0, ll5, 120, 125, and 130. WWW declares a 3-for-l split. In this case, the 
strike prices would be divided by 3 (and rounded to the nearest eighth); the number 
of contracts in every account would be tripled; and each option would still be an 
option on 100 shares of WWW stock. The general rule of thumb is that when a split 
results in round lots (2-for-l, 3-for-l, 4-for-l, etc.), the number of option contracts is 

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
30 Part I: Basic Properties ol Stock Options 
increased and the strike price is decreased, and each option still represents 100 
shares of the underlying stock. 
In this case, the strikes listed above (110 through 130) would be adjusted to• 
become new strikes: 36.625, 38.375, 40, 41.625, and 43.375. The 40 strike would be 
assigned the standard strike price symbol of the letter H. However, the others would 
need to be designated by the exchange, so U might stand for 38.375, V for 41.625, 
and so forth. 
Example 4: When a split does not result in a round lot, a different adjustment must 
be used for the options. Suppose that AAA Corp. (symbol: AAA) is trading at $60 per 
share and declares a 3-for-2 split. In this case, each option's strike will be multiplied 
by two-thirds (to reflect the 3-for-2 split), but the number of contracts held in an 
account will remain the same and each option will be an option on 150 shares of AAA 
stock. 
Suppose that there were strikes of 55, 60, and 65 preceding this split. After the 
split, AAA common itself would be trading at $40 per share, reflecting the post-split 
3-for-2 adjustment from its previous price of 60. There would be new options with 
strikes of 36.625, 40, and 43.375 (these had been the pre-split strikes of 55, 60, and 
65). 
Since each of these options would be for 150 shares of the underlying stock, the 
exchange creates a new option base symbol for these options, because they no longer 
represent 100 shares of AAA common. Suppose the exchange says that the post-split, 
150-share option contracts will henceforth use the option symbol AAX. 
After the split, the exchange will then list "normal" 100-share options on AAA, 
perhaps with strike prices of 35, 40, and 45. This creates a situation that can some­
times be confusing for traders and can lead to problems. There will actually be two 
options with striking prices of 40 - one for 100 shares and the other for 150 shares. 
Suppose the July contract is being considered. The option with symbol AAAGH is a 
July 40 option on 100 shares of AAA Corp., while the option with symbol AAXGH is 
a July 40 option on 150 shares of AAA Corp. Since option prices are quoted on a per­
share basis, they will have nearly identical price quotes on any quote system (see item 
5). If one is not careful, you might trade the wrong one, thereby incurring a risk that 
you did not intend to take. 
For example, suppose that you sell, as an opening transaction, the AAXGH July 
40 call at a price of 3. Furthermore, suppose that you did not realize that you were 
selling the 150-share option; this was a mistake, but you don't yet realize it. A couple 
of days later, you see that this option is now selling at 13 - a loss of 10 points. You 
might think that you had just lost $1,000, but upon examining your brokerage state­
ment (or confirms, or day trading sheet), you suddenly see that the loss is $1,500 on 

===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
0.,,,, 1: Definitions 31 
that contract! Quite a difference, especially if multiple contracts are involved. This 
could come as a shock if you thought you were hedged (perhaps you bought 100 
shares of AAA common when you sold this call), only to find out later that you didn't 
have a correctly hedged position in place after all. 
Even more severe problems can arise if this stock splits again during the life 
of this option. Sometimes the options will be adjusted so that they represent a non­
standard number of shares, such as the 150-share options involved here; and after 
multiple splits, the exchange may even apply a multiplier to the option, rather than 
adjusting its strike price repeatedly. This type of thing wouldn't happen on the first 
stock split, but it might occur on subsequent stock splits, spaced closely together 
over the life of an option. In such a case, the dollar value of the option moves much 
faster than one would expect from looking at a quote of the contract. 
So you must be sure that you are trading the exact contract you intend to, and 
not relying on the fact that the striking price is correct and the option price quote 
seems to be in line. One must verify that the option being bought or sold is exactly 
the one intended. In general, it is a good idea, after a split or similar adjustment, to 
establish opening positions solely with the standard contracts and to leave the split­
adjusted contracts alone. 
5. All options are quoted on a per-share basis, regardless of how many shares of 
stock the option involves. Normally the quote assumes 100 shares of the under­
lying stock. However, in a case like the UVW options just described, a quote of 3 
for the UVW April 39¼ means a dollar price of $306 ($3 x 102). 
6. Changes in the price of the underlying stock can also bring about new striking 
prices. XYZ is a $47 stock with striking prices of 45 and 50. If the price of XYZ 
stock falls to $40, the striking prices of 45 and 50 do not give option traders 
enough opportunities in XYZ. So the exchange might introduce a new striking 
price of 40. In practice, a new series is generally opened when the stock trades 
at the lowest (or highest) existing strike in any series. For example, if XYZ is 
falling, as soon as it traded at or below 45, the striking price of 40 may be intro­
duced. The officials of the option exchange that trades XYZ options make the 
decision as to the exact day when the strike begins trading. 
POSITION LIMIT AND EXERCISE LIMIT 
1. An investor or a group of investors cannot be long or short more than a set limit 
of contracts in one stock on the same side of the market. The actual limit varies 
according to the trading activity in the underlying stock. The most heavily trad­
ed stocks with a large number of shares outstanding have position limits of 75,000 

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
32 Part I: Basic Properties ol Stock Options 
contracts. Smaller stocks have position limits of 60,000, 31,000, 22,500, or 13,500 
contracts. These limits can be expected to increase over time, if stocks' capital­
izations continue to increase. The exchange on which the option is listed makes 
available a list of the position limits on each of its optionable stocks. So, if one 
were long the limit of XYZ call options, he cannot at the same time be short any 
XYZ put options. Long calls and short puts are on the same side of the market; 
that is, both are bullish positions. Similarly, long puts and short calls are both on 
the bearish side of the market. While these position limits generally exceed by far 
any position that an individual investor normally attains, the limits apply to "relat­
ed" accounts. For instance, a money manager or investment advisor who is man­
aging many accounts cannot exceed the limit when all the accounts' positions are 
combined. 
8. The numher of contracts that can be exercised in a particular period of time ( usu­
ally 5 business days) is also limited to the same arrwunt as the position limit. This 
exercise limit prevents an investor or group from "cornering" a stock by repeat­
edly buying calls one day and exercising them the next, day after day. Option 
exchanges set exact limits, which are subject to change. 
ORDER ENTRY 
Order Information 
Of the various types of orders, each specifies: 
1. whether the transaction is a buy or sell, 
2. the option to be bought or sold, 
3. whether the trade is opening or closing a position, 
4. whether the transaction is a spread (discussed later), and 
5. the desired price. 
TYPES OF ORDERS 
Many types of orders are acceptable for trading options, but not all are acceptable on 
all exchanges that trade options. Since regulations change, information regarding 
which order is valid for a given exchange is best supplied by the broker to the cus­
tomer. The following orders are acceptable on all option exchanges: 
Market Order. This is a simple order to buy or sell the option at the best pos­
sible price as soon as the order gets to the exchange floor. 

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
Cl,apter 1: Definitions 33 
Market Not Held Order. The customer who uses this type of order is giv­
ing the floor broker discretion in executing the order. The floor broker is not 
held responsible for the final outcome. For example, if a floor broker has a "mar­
ket not held" order to buy, and he feels that the stock will "downtick" (decline 
in price) or that there is a surplus of sellers in the crowd, he may often hold off 
on the execution of the buy order, figuring that the price will decline shortly and 
that the order can then be executed at a more favorable price. In essence, the 
customer is giving the floor broker the right to use some judgment regarding the 
execution of the order. If the floor broker has an opinion and that opinion is cor­
rect, the customer will probably receive a better price than if he had used a reg­
ular market order. If the broker's opinion is wrong, however, the price of the 
execution may be worse than a regular market order. 
Limit Order. The limit order is an order to buy or to sell at a specified price 
- the limit. It may be executed at a better price than the limit - a lower one for 
buyers and a higher one for sellers. However, if the limit is never reached, the 
order may never be executed. 
Sometimes a limit order may specify a discretionary margin for the floor broker. 
In other words, the order may read "Buy at 5 with dime discretion." This instruction 
enables the floor broker to execute the order at 5.10 if he feels that the market will 
never reach 5. Under no circumstances, however, can the order be executed at a 
price higher than 5.10. Other orders may or may not be accepted·on some option 
exchanges. 
Stop Order. This order is not always valid on all option exchanges. A stop 
order becomes a market order when the security trades at or through the price 
specified on the order. Buy stop orders are placed above the current market 
price, and sell stop orders are entered below the current market price. Such 
orders are used to either limit loss or protect a profit. For example, if a holder's 
option is selling for 3, a sell stop order for 2 is activated if the market drops 
down below the 2 level, whereupon the floor broker would execute the order as 
soon as possible. The customer, however, is not guaranteed that the trade will be 
exactly at 2. 
Stop-Limit Order. This order becomes a limit order when the specified price 
is reached. Whereas the stop order has to be executed as soon as the stop price 
is reached, the stop-limit may or may not be filled, depending on market behav­
ior. For instance, if the option is trading at 3 while a stop-limit order is placed 
at a price of 2, the floor broker may not be able to get a trade exactly at 2. If the 

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
34 Part I: Basic Properties of Stock Options 
option continues to decline through 2 - 1.90, 1.80, 1.70, and so on - without ~ 
ever regaining the 2 level, then the broker's hands are tied. He may not execute 
what is now a limit order unless the call trades at 2. 
Good-Until-Canceled Order. A limit, stop, or stop-limit order may be des­
ignated "good until canceled." If the conditions for the order execution do not 
occur, the order remains valid for 6 months without renewal by the customer. 
Customers using an on-line broker will not be able to enter "market not held" 
orders, and may not be able to use stop orders or good-until-canceled orders either, 
depending on the brokerage firm. 
PROFITS AND PROFIT GRAPHS 
A visual presentation of the profit potential of any position is important to the over­
all understanding and evaluation of it. In option trading, the many multi-security 
positions especially warrant strict analysis: stock versus options (as in covered or ratio 
writing) or options versus options (as in spreads). Some strategists prefer a table list­
ing the outcomes of a particular strategy for the stock at various prices; others think 
the strategy is more clearly demonstrated by a graph. In the rest of the text, both a 
table and a graph will be presented for each new strategy discussed. 
Example: A customer wishes to evaluate the purchase of a call option. The potential 
profits or losses of a purchase of an XYZ July 50 call at 4 can be arrayed in either a 
table or a graph of outcomes at expiration. Both Table 1-5 and Figure 1-5 depict the 
same information; the graph is merely the line representing the column marked 
"Profit or Loss" in the table. The vertical axis represents dollars of profit or loss, and 
the horizontal axis shows the stock price at expiration. In this case, the dollars of prof­
it and the stock price are at the expiration date. Often, the strategist wants to deter­
mine what the potential profits and losses will be before expiration, rather than at the 
expiration date itself. Tables and graphs lend themselves well to the necessary analy­
sis, as will be seen in detail in various places later on. 
In practice, such an example is too simple to require a table or a graph - cer­
tainly not both - to evaluate the potential profits and losses of a simple call purchase 
held to expiration. However, as more complex strategies are discussed, these tools 
become ever more useful for quickly determining such things as when a position 
makes money and when it loses, or how fast one's risk increases at certain stock 
prices. 

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
Cl,opter 1: Definitions 
TABLE 1-5. 
Potential profits and losses for an XYZ call purchase. 
XYZ Price at Call Price at Profit or 
Expiration Expiration Loss 
40 $ 0 -$ 400 
45 0 - 400 
50 0 - 400 
55 5 + 100 
60 10 + 600 
70 20 + 1,600 
FIGURE 1-5. 
Graph of potential profits for an XYZ call purchase. 
C 
.Q 
~ ·a 
X 
w 
1il 
(J) 
(J) 
$0 0 ..J 
5 
-e a. 
-$400 
Stock Price at Expiration 
35 

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====


===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
fli\R'E II 
Call Option · 
.. Strategies 

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
INTRODUCTION 
The average person dealing in option trading utilizes primarily one of two option 
strategies - call buying or covered call writing. These strategies are, at face value, 
simple, and they are therefore the ones most often tried. There are many more 
strategies involving the use of call options, many of which will be described later in 
this Part. However, Chapters 2 and 3 deal with the fundamental call option strate­
gies. 
Both covered call writing and call buying are relatively simple strategies, but, 
like any investment, they can be employed with differing levels of skill and complex­
ity. The discussions to follow begin by describing the basics of each strategy and then 
discuss each in depth. 
38 

===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
CHAPl'ER 2 
Covered Call Writing 
Covered call writing is the name given to the strategy by which one sells a call option 
while simultaneously owning the obligated number of shares of underlying stock. 
The writer should be mildly bullish, or at least neutral, toward the underlying stock. 
By writing a call option against stock, one always decreases the risk of owning the 
stock. It may even be possible to profit from a covered write if the stock declines 
somewhat. However, the covered call writer does limit his profit potential and there­
fore may not fully participate in a strong upward move in the price of the underlying 
stock. Use of this strategy is becoming so common that the strategist must under­
stand it thoroughly. It is therefore discussed at length. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF COVERED CALL WRITING 
COVERED CALL WRITING FOR DOWNSIDE PROTECTION 
Example: An investor owns 100 shares of XYZ common stock, which is currently sell­
ing at $48 per share. If this investor sells an XYZ July 50 call option while still hold­
ing his stock, he establishes a covered write. Suppose the investor receives $300 from 
the sale of the July 50 call. If XYZ is below 50 at July expiration, the call option that 
was sold expires worthless and the investor earns the $300 that he originally received 
for writing the call. Thus, he receives $300, or 3 points, of downside protection. That 
is, he can afford to have the XYZ stock drop by 3 points and still break even on the 
total transaction. At that time he can write another call option if he so desires. 
Note that if the underlying stock should fall by more than 3 points, there will be 
a loss on the overall position. Thus, the risk in the covered writing strategy material­
izes if the stock falls by a distance greater than the call option premium that was orig­
inally taken in. 
39 

===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
40 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
THE BENEFITS OF AN INCREASE IN STOCK PRICE 
If XYZ increases in price moderately, the trader may be able to have the best of both 
worlds. 
Example: If XYZ is at or just below 50 at July expiration, the call still expires worth­
less, and the investor makes the $300 from the option in addition to having a small 
profit from his stock purchase. Again, he still owns the stock. 
Should XYZ increase in price by expiration to levels above 50, the covered 
writer has a choice of alternatives. As one alternative, he could do nothing, in which 
case the option would be assigned and his stock would be called away at the striking 
price of 50. In that case, his profits would be equal to the $300 received from selling 
the call plus the profit on the increase of his stock from the purchase price of 48 to 
the sale price of 50. In this case, however, he would no longer own the stock. If as 
another alternative he desires to retain his stock ownership, he can elect to buy back 
( or cover) the written call in the open market. This decision might involve taking a 
loss on the option part of the covered writing transaction, but he would have a cor­
respondingly larger profit, albeit unrealized, from his stock purchase. Using some 
specific numbers, one can see how this second alternative works out. 
Example: XYZ rises to a price of 60 by July expiration. The call option then sells near 
its intrinsic value of 10. If the investor covers the call at 10, he loses $700 on the 
option portion of his covered write. (Recall that he originally received $300 from the 
sale of the option, and now he is buying it back for $1,000.) However, he relieves the 
obligation to sell his stock at 50 ( the striking price) by buying back the call, so he has 
an unrealized gain of 12 points in the stock, which was purchased at 48. His total 
profit, including both realized and unrealized gains, is $500. 
This profit is exactly the same as he would have made if he had let his stock be 
called from him. If called, he would keep the $300 from the sale of the call, and he 
would make 2 points ( $200) from buying the stock at 48 and selling it, via exercise, at 
50. This profit, again, is a total of $500. The major difference between the two cases 
is that the investor no longer owns his stock after letting it be called away, whereas 
he retains stock ownership if he buys back the written call. Which of the two alter­
natives is the better one in a given situation is not always clear. 
No matter how high the stock climbs in price, the profit from a covered write is 
limited because the writer has obligated himself to sell stock at the striking price. The 
covered writer still profits when the stock climbs, but possibly not by as much as he 
might have had he not written the call. On the other hand, he is receiving $300 of 
immediate cash inflow, because the writer may take the premium immediately and 

===== PDF PAGE 63 =====
Gapter 2: Covered Call Writing 41 
do with it as he pleases. That income can represent a substantial increase in the 
income currently provided by the dividends on the underlying stock, or it can act to 
offset part of the loss in case the stock declines. 
For readers who prefer formulae, the profit potential and break-even point of a 
covered write can be summarized as follows: 
Maximum profit potential = Strike price Stock price + Call price 
Downside break-even point = Stock price - Call price 
QUANTIFICATION OF THE COVERED WRITE 
Table 2-1 and Figure 2-1 depict the profit graph for the example involving the XYZ 
covered write of the July 50 call. The table makes the assumption that the call is 
bought back at parity. If the stock is called away, the same total profit of $500 results; 
but the price involved on the stock sale is always 50, and the option profit is always 
$300. 
Several conclusions can be drawn. The break-even point is 45 (zero total prof­
it) with risk below 45; the maximum profit attainable is $500 if the position is held 
until expiration; and the profit if the stock price is unchanged is $300, that is, the cov­
ered writer makes $300 even if his stock goes absolutely nowhere. 
The profit graph for a covered write always has the shape shown in Figure 2-1. 
Note that the maximum profit always occurs at all stock prices equal to or greater 
than the striking price, if the position is held until expiration. However, there is 
downside risk. If the stock declines in price by too great an amount, the option pre­
mium cannot possibly compensate for the entire loss. Downside protective strategies, 
which are discussed later, attempt to deal with the limitation of this downside risk. 
TABLE 2-1. 
The XYZ July 50 call. 
XYZ Price Stock July 50 Call Call Total 
at Expiration Profit at Expiration Profit Profit 
40 -$ 800 0 +$300 -$500 
45 - 300 0 + 300 0 
48 0 0 + 300 + 300 
50 + 200 0 + 300 + 500 
55 + 700 5 - 200 + 500 
60 + 1,200 10 - 700 + 500 

===== PDF PAGE 64 =====
42 
FIGURE 2-1. 
XYZ covered write. 
C +$500 
0 
e ·a. 
i.ti 
cii en $0 en 0 
...J 
0 
~ a. 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Maximum Profit Range 
50 55 60 
"-. Downside Risk 
Stock Price at Expiration 
COVERED WRITING PHILOSOPHY 
The primary objective of covered writing, for most investors, is increased income 
through stock ownership. An ever-increasing number of private and institutional 
investors are writing call options against the stocks that they own. The facts that the 
option premium acts as a partial compensation for a decline in price by the underly­
ing stock, and that the premium represents an increase in income to the stockhold­
er, are evident. The strategy of owning the stock and writing the call will outperform 
outright stock ownership if the stock falls, remains the same, or even rises slightly. In 
fact, the only time that the outright owner of the stock will outperform a covered 
writer is if the stock increases in price by a relatively substantial amount during the 
life of the call. Moreover, if one consistently writes call options against his stock, his 
portfolio will show less variability of results from quarter to quarter. The total posi­
tion - long stock and short option - has less volatility than the stock alone, so on a 
quarter-by-quarter basis, results will be closer to average than they would be with 
normal stock ownership. This is an attractive feature, especially for portfolio man­
agers. 
However, one should not assume that covered writing will outperform stock 
ownership. Stocks sometimes tend to make most of their gains in large spurts. A cov­
ered writer will not participate in moves such as that. The long-term gains that are 
quoted for holding stocks include periods of large gains and sometimes periods of 
large losses as well. The covered writer will not participate in the largest of those 
gains, since his profit potential is limited. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 2 | PDF PAGES 65-122 =====

===== PDF PAGE 65 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 43 
PHYSICAL LOCATION Of THE STOCK 
Before getting more involved in the details of covered writing strategy, it may be use­
ful to review exactly what stock holdings may be written against. Recall that this dis­
cussion applies to listed options. If one has deposited stock with his broker in either 
a cash or a margin account, he may write an option for each 100 shares that he owns 
without any additional requirement. However, it is possible to write covered options 
without actually depositing stock with a brokerage firm. There are several ways in 
which to do this, all involving the deposit of stock with a bank. 
Once the stock is deposited with the bank, the investor may have the bank issue 
an escrow receipt or letter of guarantee to the brokerage firm at which the investor 
does his option business. The bank must be an "approved" bank in order for the bro­
kerage firm to accept a letter of guarantee, and not all firms accept letters of guaran­
tee. These items cost money, and as a new receipt or letter is required for each new 
option written, the costs may become prohibitive to the customer if only 100 or 200 
shares of stock are involved. The cost of an escrow receipt can range from as low as 
$15 to upward of $40, depending on the bank involved. 
There is another alternative open to the customer who wishes to write options 
without depositing his stock at the brokerage firin. He may deposit his stock with a 
bank that is a member of the Depository Trust Corporation (DTC). The DTC guar­
antees the Options Clearing Corporation that it will, in fact, deliver stock should an 
assignment notice be given to the call writer. This is the most convenient method for 
the investor to use, and is the one used by most of the institutional covered writing 
investors. There is usually no additional charge for this service by the bank to insti­
tutional accounts. However, since only a limited number of banks are members of 
DTC, and these banks are generally the larger banks located in metropolitan centers, 
it may be somewhat difficult for many individual investors to take advantage of the 
DTC opportunity. 
TYPES Of COVERED WRITES 
While all covered writes involve selling a call against stock that is owned, different 
terms are used to describe various categories of covered writing. The two broadest 
terms, under which all covered writes can be classified, are the out-of the-rrwney cov­
ered write and the in-the-rrwney covered write. These refer, obviously, to whether the 
option itself was in-the-money or out-of-the-money when the write was first estab­
lished. Sometimes one may see covered writes classified by the nature of the stock 
involved (low-priced covered write, high-yield covered write, etc;), but these are only 
subcases of the two broad categories. 

===== PDF PAGE 66 =====
44 Part II: Call Option Strategies. 
In general, out-of-the-money covered writes offer higher potential rewards but 
have less risk protection than do in-the-money covered writes. One can establish an 
aggressive or defensive covered writing position, depending on how far the call 
option is in- or out-of-the-money when the write is established. In-the-money writes 
are more defensive covered writing positions. 
Some examples may help to illustrate how one covered write can be consider­
ably more conservative, from a strategy viewpoint, than another. 
Example: XYZ common stock is selling at 45 and two options are being considered 
for writing: an XYZ July 40 selling for 8, and an XYZ July 50 selling for 1. Table 2-2 
depicts the profitability of utilizing the July 40 or the July 50 for the covered writing. 
The in-the-money covered write of the July 40 affords 8 points, or nearly 18% pro­
tection down to a price of 37 (the break-even point) at expiration. The out-of-the­
money covered write of the July 50 offers only 1 point of downside protection at expi­
ration. Hence, the in-the-rrwney covered write offers greater downside protection 
than does the out-of-the-rrwney covered write. This statement is true in general - not 
merely for this example. 
In the balance of the financial world, it is normally true that investment posi­
tions offering less risk also have lower reward potential. The covered writing exam­
ple just given is no exception. The in-the-money covered write of the July 40 has a 
maximum potential profit of $300 at any point above 40 at the time of expiration. 
However, the out-of-the-money covered write of the July 50 has a maximum poten­
tial profit of $600 at any point above 50 at expiration. The maximum potential profit 
of an out-of-the-rrwney covered write is generally greater than that of an in-the­
rrwney write. 
TABLE 2-2. 
Profit or loss of the July 40 and July 50 calls. 
In-the-Money Write Out-of-the-Money Write 
of July 40 of July SO 
Stock of Total Stock at Total 
Expiration Profit Expiration Profit 
35 -$200 35 -$900 
37 0 40 - 400 
40 + 300 44 0 
45 + 300 45 + 100 
50 + 300 50 + 600 
60 + 300 60 + 600 

===== PDF PAGE 67 =====
Cl,apter 2: Covered Call Writing 45 
To make a true comparison between the two covered writes, one must look at 
what happens with the stock between 40 and 50 at expiration. The in-the-money 
write attains its maximum profit anywhere within that range. Even a 5-point decline 
by the underlying stock at expiration would still leave the in-the-money writer with 
his maximum profit. However, realizing the maximum profit potential with an out-of 
the-money covered write always requires a rise in price by the underlying stock. This 
further illustrates the more conservative nature of the in-the-money write. It should 
be noted that in-the-money writes, although having a smaller profit potential, can still 
be attractive on a percentage return basis, especially if the write is done in a margin 
account. 
One can construct a more aggressive position by writing an out-of-the-money 
call. One's outlook for the underlying stock should be bullish in that case. If one is 
neutral or moderately bearish on the stock, an in-the-money covered write is more 
appropriate. If one is truly bearish on a stock he owns, he should sell the stock instead 
of establishing a covered write. 
THE TOTAL RETURN CONCEPT 
OF COVERED WRITING 
When one writes an out-of-the-money option, the overall position tends to reflect 
more of the result of the stock price movement and less of the benefits of writing the 
call. Since the premium on an out-of-the-money call is relatively small, the total posi­
tion will be quite susceptible to loss if the stock declines. If the stock rises, the posi­
tion will make money regardless of the result in the option at expiration. On the other 
hand, an in-the-money write is more of a "total" position - taking advantage of the 
benefit of the relatively large option premium. If the stock declines, the position can 
still make a profit; in fact, it can even make the maximum profit. Of course, an in­
the-money write will also make money if the stock rises in price, but the profit is not 
generally as great in percentage terms as is that of an out-of-the-money write. 
Those who believe in the total return concept of covered writing consider both 
downside protection and maximum potential return as important factors and are 
willing to have the stock called away, if necessary, to meet their objectives. When 
premiums are moderate or small, only in-the-money writes satisfy the total return 
philosophy. 
Some covered writers prefer never to lose their stock through exercise, and as 
a result will often write options quite far out-of-the-money to minimize the chances 
of being called by expiration. These writers receive little downside protection and, to 
make money, must depend almost entirely on the results of the stock itself. Such a 

===== PDF PAGE 68 =====
46 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
philosophy is more like being a stockholder and trading options against one's stock 
position than actually operating a covered writing strategy. In fact, some covered 
writers will attempt to buy back written options for quick profits if such profits mate­
rialize during the life of the covered write. This, too, is a stock ownership philosophy, 
not a covered writing strategy. The total return concept represents the true strategy 
in covered writing, whereby one views the entire position as a single entity and is not 
predominantly concerned with the results of his stock ownership. 
THE CONSERVATIVE COVERED WRITE 
Covered writing is generally accepted to be a conservative strategy. This is because 
the covered writer always has less risk than a stockholder, provided that he holds the 
covered write until expiration of the written call. If the underlying stock declines, the 
covered writer will always offset part of his loss by the amount of the option premi­
um received, no matter how small. 
As was demonstrated in previous sections, however, some covered writes are 
clearly more conservative than others. Not all option writers agree on what is meant 
by a conservative covered write. Some believe that it involves writing an option 
(probably out-of-the-money) on a conservative stock, generally one with high yield 
and low volatility. It is true that the stock itself in such a position is conservative, but 
the position is more aptly termed a covered write on a conservative stock. This is dis­
tinctly different from a conservative covered write. 
A true conservative covered write is one in which the total position is conserva­
tive - offering reduced risk and a good probability of making a profit. An in-the-money 
wiite, even on a stock that itself is not conservative, can become a conservative total 
position when the option itself is properly chosen. Clearly, an investor cannot write 
calls that are too deeply in-the-money. If he did, he would get large amounts of down­
side protection, but his returns would be severely limited. If all that one desired was 
maximum protection of his money at a nominal rate of profit, he could leave the 
money in a bank. Instead, the conservative covered writer strives to make a potential­
ly acceptable return while still receiving an above-average amount of protection. 
Example: Again assume XYZ common stock is selling at 45 and an XYZ July 40 call 
is selling at 8. A covered write of the XYZ July 40 would require, in a cash account, 
an investment of $3,700 - $4,500 to purchase 100 shares of XYZ, less the $800 
received in option premiums. The write has a maximum profit potential of $300. The 
potential return from this position is therefore $300/$3, 700, just over 8% for the peri­
od during which the write must be held. Since it is most likely that the option has 9 
months of life or less, this return would be well in excess of 10% on a per annum 

===== PDF PAGE 69 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 47 
basis. If the write were done in a margin account, the return would be considerably 
higher. 
Note that we have ignored dividends paid by the underlying stock and commis­
sion charges, factors that are discussed in detail in the next section. Also, one should 
be aware that if he is looking at an annualized return from a covered write, there is 
no guarantee that such a return could actually be obtained. All that is certain is that 
the writer could make 8% in 9 months. There is no guarantee that 9 months from 
now, when the call expires, there will be an equivalent position to establish that will 
extend the same return for the remainder of the annualization period. Annual returns 
should be used only for comparative purposes between covered writes. 
The writer has a position that has an annualized return (for comparative pur­
poses) of over 10% and 8 points of downside protection. Thus, the total position is an 
investment that will not lose money unless XYZ common stock falls by more than 8 
points, or about 18%; and is an investment that could return the equivalent of 10% 
annually should XYZ common stock rise, remain the same, or fall by 5 points (to 40). 
This is a conservative position. Even if XYZ itself is not a conservative stock, the 
action of writing this option has made the total position a conservative one. The only 
factor that might detract from the conservative nature of the total position would be 
if XYZ were so volatile that it could easily fall more than 8 points in 9 months. 
In a strategic sense, the total position described above is better and more con­
servative than one in which a writer buys a conservative stock -yielding perhaps 6 or 
7% - and writes an out-of-the-money call for a minimal premium. If this conserva­
tive stock were to fall in price, the writer would be in danger of being in a loss situa­
tion, because here the option is not providing anything more than the most minimal 
downside protection. As was described earlier, a high-yielding, low-volatility stock 
will not have much time premium in its in-the-money options, so that one cannot 
effectively establish an in-the-money write on such a "conservative" stock. 
COMPUTING RETURN ON INVESTMENT 
Now that the reader has some general feeling for covered call writing, it is time to 
discuss the specifics of computing return on investment. One should always know 
exactly what his potential returns are, including all costs, when he establishes a cov­
ered writing position. Once the procedure for computing returns is clear, one can 
more logically decide which covered writes are the most attractive. 
There are three basic elements of a covered write that should be computed 
before entering into the position. The first is the return if exercised. This is the return 
on investment that one would achieve if the stock were called away. For an out-of-the-

===== PDF PAGE 70 =====
48 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
money covered write, it is necessary for the stock to rise in price in order for the return 
if exercised to be achieved. However, for an in-the-money covered write, the return if 
exercised would be attained even if the stock were unchanged in price at option expi­
ration. Thus, it is often advantageous to compute the return if unchanged - that is, the 
return that would be realized if the underlying stock were unchanged when the option 
expired. One can more fairly compare out-of-the-money and in-the-money covered 
writes by using the return if unchanged, since no assumption is made concerning stock 
price movement. The third important statistic that the covered writer should consid­
er is the exact downside break-even point after all costs are included. Once this down­
side break-even point is known, one can readily compute the percentage of downside 
protection that he would receive from selling the call. 
Example 1: An investor is considering the following covered write of a 6-month call: 
Buy 500 XYZ common at 43, sell 5 XYZ July 45 calls at 3. One must first compute the 
net investment required (Table 2-3). In a cash account, this investment consists of 
paying for the stock in full, less the net proceeds from the sale of the options. Note 
that this net investment figure includes all commissions necessary to establish the 
position. (The commissions used here are approximations, as they vary from firm to 
firm.) Of course, if the investor withdraws the option premium, as he is free to do, 
his net investment will consist of the stock cost plus commissions. Once the neces­
sary investment is known, the writer can compute the return if exercised. Table 2-4 
illustrates the computation. One first computes the profit if exercised and then 
divides that quantity by the net investment to obtain the return if exercised. Note 
that dividends are included in this computation; it is assumed that XYZ stock will pay 
$500 in dividends on the 500 shares during the life of the call. Moreover, all com­
missions are included as well - the net investment includes the original stock pur­
chase and option sale commissions, and the stock sale commission is explicitly listed. 
For the return computed here to be realized, XYZ stock would have to rise in 
price from its current price of 43 to any price above 45 by expiration. As noted ear­
lier, it may be more useful to know what return could be made by the writer if the 
stock did not move anywhere at all. Table 2-5 illustrates the method of computing the 
TABLE 2-3. 
Net investment required-cash account. 
Stock cost (500 shares at 43) 
Plus stock purchase commissions 
Less option premiums received 
Plus option sale commissions 
Net cash investment 
+ 
$21,500 
320 
1,500 
+ 60 
$20,380 

===== PDF PAGE 71 =====
Oapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
TABLE 2-4. 
Return if exercised-cash account. 
Stock sale proceeds (500 shares at 45) 
Less stock sale commissions 
Plus dividends earned until expiration 
Less net investment 
Net profit if exercised 
Return if exercised $2,290 = 11 2o/c 
$20,380 . 
0 
TABLE 2-5. 
Return if unchanged-cash account. 
Unchanged stock value (500 shares at 43) 
Plus dividends 
Less net investment 
Profit if unchanged 
Return if unchanged $1,620 = 7.9'¼ 
$20,380 ° 
+ 
$22,500 
330 
500 
- 20,380 
$ 2,290 
$21,500 
+ 500 
- 20,380 
$ 1,620 
49 
return if unchanged - also called the static return and sometimes incorrectly referred 
to as the "expected return." Again, one first calculates the profit and then calculates 
the return by dividing the profit by the net investment. An important point should be 
made here: There is no stock sale commission included in Table 2-5. This is the most 
common way of calculating the return if unchanged; it is done this way because in a 
majority of cases, one would continue to hold the stock if it were unchanged and 
would write another call option against the same stock. Recall again, though, that if 
the written call is in-the-rrwney, the return if unchanged is the same as the return if 
exercised. Stock sale commissions must therefore be included in that case. 
Once the necessary returns have been computed and the writer has a feeling for 
how much money he could make in the covered write, he next computes the exact 
downside break-even point to determine what kind of downside protection the writ­
ten call provides (Table 2-6). The total return concept of covered writing necessitates 
viewing both potential income and downside protection as important criteria for 
selecting a writing position. If the stock were held to expiration and the $500 in div­
idends received, the writer would break even at a price of 39.8. Again, a stock sale 
commission is not generally included in the break-even point computation, because 

===== PDF PAGE 72 =====
50 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
the written call would expire totally worthless and the writer might then write anoth­
er call on the same stock. Later, we discuss the subject of continuing to write against 
stocks already owned. It will be seen that in many cases, it is advantageous to con­
tinue to hold a stock and write against it again, rather than to sell it and establish a 
covered write in a new stock. 
TABLE 2-6. 
Downside break-even point-cash account. 
Net investment 
Less dividends 
Total stock cost to expiration 
Divide by shares held 
Break-even price 
$20,380 
500 
$19,880 
+ 500 
39.8 
Next, we translate the break-even price into percent downside protection 
(Table 2-7), which is a convenient way of comparing the levels of downside protec­
tion among variously priced stocks. We will see later that it is actually better to com­
pare the downside protection with the volatility of the underlying stock. However, 
since percent downside protection is a common and widely accepted method that is 
more readily calculated, it is necessary to be familiar with it as well. 
Before moving on to discuss what kinds of returns one should attempt to strive 
for in which situati_ons, the same example will be worked through again for a covered 
write in a margin account. The use of margin will provide higher potential returns, 
since the net investment will be smaller. However, the margin interest charge 
incurred on the debit balance (the amount of money borrowed from the brokerage 
firm) will cause the break-even point to be higher, thus slightly reducing the amount 
of downside protection available from writing the call. Again, all commissions to 
establish the position are included in the net investment computation. 
TABLE 2-7. 
Percent downside protection-cash account. 
Initial stock price 
Less break-even price 
Points of protection 
Divide by original stock price 
Equals percent downside protection 
43 
-39.8 
3.2 
+43 
7.4% 

===== PDF PAGE 73 =====
Clrapter 2: Covered Call Writing 51 
Example 2: Recall that the net investment for the cash write was $20,380. A 
margin covered write requires less than half of the investment of a cash write when 
the margin rate (set by the Federal Reserve) is 50%. In a margin account, if one 
desires to remove the premium from the account, he may do so immediately provid­
ed that he has enough reserve equity in the account to cover the purchase of the 
stock. If he does so, his net investment would be equal to the debit balance calcula­
tion shown on the right in Table 2-8. 
TABLE 2-8. 
Net investment required-margin account. 
Stock cost $21,500 
Plus stock commissions + 320 Debit balance calculation: 
Net stock cost $21,820 Net stock cost $21,820 
Times margin rate X 50% Less equity - 10,910 
Equity required $10,910 Debit balance $10,910 
Less premiums received 1,500 (at 50% margin) 
Plus option commissions + 60 
Net margin investment $ 9,470 
Tables 2-9 to 2-12 illustrate the computation of returns from writing on margin. 
If one has already computed the cash returns, he can use method 2 most easily. 
Method 1 involves no prior profit calculations. 
TABLE 2-9. 
Return if exercised-margin account. 
Method 1 Method 2 
Stock sale proceeds 
Less stock commission 
Plus dividends 
$22,500 Net profit if exercised-cash $2,290 
+ 
Less margin interest charges 
330 
500 
(10% on $10,910 for 6 months) - 545 
Less debit balance 
Less net margin investment 
Net profit-margin 
- 10,910 
- 9 470 
$ 1,745 
Less margin interest charges -
Net profit if exercised­
margin 
$1,745 Return if exercised = $9 ,470 = 18.4% 
545 
$1,745 

===== PDF PAGE 74 =====
52 
TABLE 2-10. 
Return if unchanged-margin account. 
Method 1 
Unchanged stock value (500 
shares at 43) 
Plus dividends 
Less margin interest charges 
(10% on $10,910 debit for 
6 months) 
Less debit balance 
Less net investment (margin) 
Net profit if unchanged­
margin 
$21,500 
+ 500 
545 
10,910 
- 9 470 
$ 1,075 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Method 2 
Profit if unchanged-cash 
Less margin interest charges -
Net profit if unchanged­
margin 
$1,620 
545 
$1,075 
Return if unchanged = $ l ,075 = 11 .4% 
$9,470 
TABLE 2-11. 
Break-even point-margin write. 
Net margin investment 
Plus debit balance 
Less dividends 
Plus margin interest charges 
Total stock cost to expiration 
Divide by shares held 
Break-even point-margin 
TABLE 2-12. 
Percent downside protection-margin write. 
Initial stock price 
Less break-even price-margin 
Points of protection 
Divide by original stock price 
Equals percent downside protection-margin 
$ 9,470 
+ 10,910 
500 
+ 545 
$20,425 
+ 500 
40.9 
43 
-40.9 
2.1 
+43 
4.9% 
The return if exercised is 18.4% for the covered write using margin. In Example 
1 the return if exercised for a cash write was computed as 11.2%. Thus, the return if 
exercised from a margin write is considerably higher. In fact, unless a fairly deep in­
the-money write is being considered, the return on margin will always be higher than 

===== PDF PAGE 75 =====
Cl,apter 2: Covered Call Writing 53 
the return from cash. The farther out-of-the-money that the written call is, the big­
ger the discrepancy between cash and margin returns will be when the return if exer­
cised is computed. 
As with the computation for return if exercised for a write on margin, the return 
if unchanged calculation is similar for cash and margin also. The only difference is the 
subtraction of the margin interest charges from the profit. The return if unchanged is 
also higher for a margin write, provided that there is enough option premium to com­
pensate for the margin interest charges. The return if unchanged in the cash example 
was 7.9% versus 11.4% for the margin write. In general, the farther from the strike in 
either direction - out-of-the-money or in-the-money - the less the return if 
unchanged on margin will exceed the cash return if unchanged. In fact, for deeply out­
of-the-money or deeply in-the-money calls, the return if unchanged will be higher on 
cash than on margin. Table 2-11 shows that the break-even point on margin, 40.9, is 
higher than the break-even point from a cash write, 39.8, because of the margin inter­
est charges. Again, the percent downside protection can be computed as shown in 
Table 2-12. Obviously, since the break-even point on margin is higher than that on 
cash, there is less percent downside protection in a margin covered write. 
One other point should be made regarding a covered write on margin: The bro­
kerage firm will loan you only half of the strike price amount as a maximum. Thus, it 
is not possible, for example, to buy a stock at 20, sell a deeply in-the-money call struck 
at 10 points, and trade for free. In that case, the brokerage firm would loan you only 
5 - half the amount of the strike. 
Even so, it is still possible to create a covered call write on margin that has little or 
even zero margin .requirement. For example, suppose a stock is selling at 38 and that a 
long-term LEAPS option struck at 40 is selling for 19. Then the margin requirement is 
zero! This does not mean you're getting something for free, however. True, your invest­
ment is zero, but your risk is still 19 points. Also, your broker would ask for some sort of 
minimum margin to begin with and would of course ask for maintenance margin if the 
underlying stock should fall in price. Moreover, you would be paying margin interest all 
during the life of this long-term LEAPS option position. Leverage can be a good thing or 
a bad thing, and this strategy has a great deal of leverage. So be careful if you utilize it. 
COMPOUND INTEREST 
The astute reader will have noticed that our computations of margin interest have 
been overly simplistic; the compounding effect of interest rates has been ignored. 
That is, since interest charges are normally applied to an account monthly, the 
investor will be paying interest in the later stages of a covered writing position not 
only on the original debit, but on all previous monthly interest charges. This effect is 
described in detail in a later chapter on arbitrage techniques. Briefly stated, rather 

===== PDF PAGE 76 =====
54 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
than computing the interest charge as the debit times the interest rate multiplied by 
the time to expiration, one should technically use: 
Margin interest charges = Debit [(l + r/ -1] 
where r is the interest rate per month and t the number of months to expiration. (It 
would be incorrect to use days to expiration, since brokerage firms compute interest 
monthly, not daily.) 
In Example 2 of the preceding section, the debit was $10,910, the time was 6 
months, and the annual interest rate was 10%. Using this more complex formula, the 
margin interest charges would be $557, as opposed to the $545 charge computed 
with the simpler formula. Thus, the difference is usually small, in terms of percent­
age, and it is therefore comrrwn practice to use the simpler method. 
SIZE OF THE POSITION 
So far it has been assumed that the writer was purchasing 500 shares of XYZ and sell­
ing 5 calls. This requires a relatively considerable investment for one position for the 
individual investor. However, one should be aware that buying too few shares for cov­
ered writing purposes can lower returns considerably. 
Example: If an investor were to buy 100 shares of XYZ at 43 and sell l July 45 call 
for 3, his return if exercised would drop from the 11.2% return (cash) that was com­
puted earlier to a return of9.9% in a cash account. Table 2-13 verifies this statement. 
Since commissions are less, on a per-share basis, when one buys more stock and 
sells more calls, the returns will naturally be higher with a 500- or 1,000-share posi­
tion than with a 100- or 200-share position. This difference can be rather dramatic, as 
Tables 2-14 and 2-15 point out. Several interesting and worthwhile conclusions can be 
drawn from these tables. The first and most obvious conclusion is that the rrwre shares 
TABLE 2-13. 
Cash investment vs. return. 
Net Investment-Cash ( l 00 shares) 
Stock cost $4,300 
Plus commissions + 85 
Less option premium 300 
Plus option commissions + 25 
Net investment $4,110 
Return If Exercised-Cash ( l 00 shares) 
Stock sale price 
Stock commissions 
Plus dividend 
Less net investment 
Net profit if exercised 
$4,500 
85 
+ 100 
- 4 110 
$ 405 
Return if exercised = $4 05 = 9. 9% 
$4,110 

===== PDF PAGE 77 =====
Cl,apter 2: Covered Call Writing 55 
one writes against, the higher his returns and the lower his break-even point will be. 
This is true for both cash and margin and is a direct result of the way commissions are 
figured: Larger trades involve smaller percentage commission charges. While the per­
centage returns increase as the number of shares increases for both cash and margin 
covered writing, the increase is much more dramatic in the case of margin. Note that 
in Table 2-14, which depicts cash transactions, the return from writing against 100 
shares is 9.9% and increases to 12. 7% if 2,000 shares are written against. This is an 
increase, but not a particularly dramatic one. However, in Table 2-15, the return if 
exercised more than doubles (21.6 vs. 10.4) and the return if unchanged nearly triples 
(13.0 vs. 4.4) when the 100-share write is compared to the 2,000-share write. This 
effect is more dramatic for margin writes due to two factors - the lower investment 
required and the more burdensome effect of margin interest charges on the profits of 
smaller positions. This effect is so dramatic that a 100-share write in a cash account in 
our example actually offers a higher return if unchanged than does the margin write 
- 7.1 % vs. 4.4%. This implies that one should carefully compute his potential returns 
if he is writing against a small number of shares on margin. 
TABLE 2-14. 
Cash covered writes (costs included). 
Shares Written Against 
100 200 300 400 500 1,000 2,000 
Return if exercised (%) 9.9 10.0 10.4 10.8 11.2 12.1 12.7 
Re~rn if unchanged(%) 7.1 7.2 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.4 8.7 
Break-even point 40.1 40.0 39.9 39.9 39.8 39.6 39.5 
TABLE 2-15. 
Margin covered writes (costs included). 
Shares Written Against 
100 200 300 400 500 1,000 2,000 
Return if exercised (%) 10.4 15.8 16.6 17.4 18.4 20.4 21.6 
Return if unchanged (%) 4.4 9.8 10.3 10.8 11.4 12.3 13.0 
Break-even point 41.2 41.1 41.0 41.0 40.9 40.7 40.6 
WHAT A DIFFERENCE A DIME MAKES 
Another aspect of covered writing that can be important as far as potential returns 
are concerned is, of course, the prices of the stock and option involved in the write. 

===== PDF PAGE 78 =====
56 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
It may seem insignificant that one has to pay an extra few cents for the stock or pos­
sibly receives a dime or 20 cents less for the call, but even a relatively small fraction 
can alter the potential returns by a surprising amount. This is especially true for in­
the-money writes, although any write will be affected. Let us use the previous 500-
share covered writing example, again including all costs. 
As before, the results are more dramatic for the margin write than for the cash 
write. In neither case does the break-even point change by much. However, the 
potential returns are altered significantly. Notice that if one pays an extra dime for 
the stock and receives a dime less for the call - the far right-hand column in Table 
2-16 - he may greatly negate the effect of writing against a larger number of shares. 
From Table 2-16, one can see that writing against 300 shares at those prices (43 for 
the stock and 3 for the call) is approximately the same return as writing against 500 
shares if the stock costs 431/s and the option brings in 27/s. 
Table 2-16 should clearly demonstrate that entering a covered writing order at 
the market may not be a prudent thing to do, especially if one's calculations for the 
potential returns are based on last sales or on closing prices in the newspaper. In the 
next section, we discuss in depth the proper procedure for entering a covered writ­
ing order. 
TABLE 2-16. 
Effect of stock and option prices on writing returns. 
Buy Stock at 43 Buy Stock at 43.10 
Sell Call at 3 Sell Call at 3 
Return if exercised 11.2% cash 10.9% cash 
18.4% margin 17.7% margin 
Return if unchanged 7.9% cash 7.6% cash 
11 .4% margin 10.7% margin 
Break-even point 39.8 cash 39.9 cash 
40.9 margin 41.0 margin 
EXECUTION OF THE COVERED WRITE ORDER 
Buy Stock at 43. I 0 
Sell Call at 2.90 
10.6% cash 
16. 9% margin 
7.3% cash 
9.9% margin 
40.0 cash 
41.1 margin 
When establishing a covered writing position, the question often arises: Which 
should be done first - buy the stock or sell the option? The correct answer is that nei­
ther should be done first! In fact, a simultaneous transaction of buying the stock and 
selling the option is the only way of assuring that both sides of the covered write are 
established at desired price levels. 

===== PDF PAGE 79 =====
Cl,apter 2: Covered Call Writing 57 
If one "legs" into the position - that is, buys the stock first and then attempts to 
sell the option, or vice versa - he is subjecting himself to a risk. 
Example: An investor wants to buy XYZ at 43 and sell the July 45 call at 3. Ifhe first 
sells the option at 3 and then tries to buy the stock, he may find that he has to pay 
more than 43 for the stock. On the other hand, if he tries to buy the stock first and 
then sell the option, he may find that the option price has moved down. In either case 
the writer will be accepting a lower return on his covered write. Table 2-16 demon­
strated how one's returns might be affected ifhe has to give up an eighth by "legging" 
into the position. 
ESTABLISHING A NET POSITION 
What the covered writer really wants to do is ensure that his net price is obtained. If 
he wants to buy stock at 43 and sell an option at 3, he is attempting to establish the 
position at 40 net. He normally would not mind paying 43.10 for the stock if he can 
sell the call at 3.10, thereby still obtaining 40 net. 
A "net" covered writing order must be placed with a brokerage firm because it 
is essential for the person actually executing the order to have full access to both the 
stock exchange and the option exchange. This is also referred to as a contingent 
order. Most major brokerage firms offer this service to their clients, although some 
place a minimum number of shares on the order. That is, one must write against at 
least 500 or 1,000 shares in order to avail himself of the service. There are, however, 
brokerage firms that will take net orders even for 100-share covered writes. Since the 
chances of giving away a dime are relatively great if one attempts to execute his own 
order by placing separate orders on two exchanges - stock and option - he should 
avail himself of the broker's service. Moreover, if his orders are for a small number of 
shares, he should deal with a broker who will take net orders for small positions. 
The reader must understand that there is no guarantee that a net order will be 
filled. The net order is always a "not held" order, meaning that the customer is not 
guaranteed an execution even if it appears that the order could be filled at prevailing 
market bids and offers. Of course, the broker will attempt to fill the order if it can 
reasonably be accomplished, since that is his livelihood. However, if the net order is 
slightly away from current market prices, the broker may have to "leg" into the posi­
tion to fill the order. The risk in this is the broker's responsibility, not the customer's. 
Therefore, the broker may elect not to take the risk and to report "nothing done" -
the order is not filled. 
If one buys stock at 43 and sells the call at 3, is the return really the same as buy­
ing the stock at 43.10 and selling the call at 3.10? The answer is, yes, the returns are 

===== PDF PAGE 80 =====
58 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
very similar when the prices differ by small amounts. This can be seen without the 
use of a table. If one pays a dime more for the stock, his investment increases by $10 
per 100 shares, or $50 total on a 500-share transaction. However, the fact that he has 
received an extra dime for the call means that the investment is reduced by $62.50. 
Thus, there is no effect on the net investment except for commissions. The commis­
sion on 500 shares at 43.10 may be slightly higher than the commission for 500 shares 
at 43. Similarly, the commission on 5 calls at 3.10 may be slightly higher than that on 
5 calls at 3. Even so, the increase in commissions would be so small that it would not 
affect the return by more than one-tenth of 1 %. 
To carry this concept to extremes may prove somewhat misleading. If one were 
to buy stock at 40½ and sell the call at ½, he would still be receiving 40 net, but sev­
eral aspects would have changed considerably. The return if exercised remains amaz­
ingly constant, but the return if unchanged and the percentage downside protection 
are reduced dramatically. If one were to buy stock at 48 and sell the call at 8 - again 
for 40 net - he would improve the return if unchanged and the percentage downside 
protection. In reality, when one places a "net" order with a brokerage firm, he nor­
mally gets an execution with prices quite close to the ones at the time the order was 
first entered. It would be a rare case, indeed, when either upside or downside 
extremes such as those mentioned here would occur in the same trading day. 
SELECTING A COVERED WRITING POSITION 
The preceding sections, in describing types of covered writes and how to compute 
returns and break-even points, have laid the groundwork for the ultimate decision 
that every covered writer must make: choosing which stock to buy and which option 
to write. This is not necessarily an easy task, because there are large numbers of 
stocks, striking prices, and expiration dates to choose from. 
Since the primary objective of covered writing for most investors is increased 
income through stock ownership, the return on investment is an important consider­
ation in determining which write to choose. However, the decision must not be made 
on the basis of return alone. More volatile stocks will offer higher returns, but they 
may also involve more risk because of their ability to fall in price quickly. Thus, the 
amount of downside protection is the other important objective of covered writing. 
Finally, the quality and technical or fundamental outlook of the underlying stock 
itself are of importance as well. The following section will help to quantify how these 
factors should be viewed by the covered writer. 

===== PDF PAGE 81 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
PROJECTED RETURNS 
59 
The return that one strives for is somewhat a matter of personal preference. In gen­
eral, the annualized return if unchanged should be used as the comparative measure 
between various covered writes. In using this return as the measuring criterion, one 
does not make any assumptions about the stock moving up in price in order to attain 
the potential return. A general rule used in deciding what is a minimally acceptable 
return is to consider a covered writing position only when the return if unchanged is 
at least 1 % per month. That is, a 3-month write would have to offer a return of at 
least 3% and a 6-month write would have to have a return if unchanged of at least 
6%. During periods of expanded option premiums, there may be so many writes that 
satisfy this criterion that one would want to raise his sights somewhat, say to 1 ½% or 
2% per month. Also, one must feel personally comfortable that his minimum return 
criterion - whether it be 1 % per month or 2% per month - is large enough to com­
pensate for the risks he is taking. That is, the downside risk of owning stock, should 
it fall far enough to outdistance the premium received, should be adequately com­
pensated for by the potential return. It should be pointed out that 1 % per month is 
not a return to be taken lightly, especially if there is a reasonable assurance that it can 
be attained. However, if less risky investments, such as bonds, were yielding 12% 
annually, the covered writer must set his sights higher. 
Normally, the returns from various covered writing situations are compared by 
annualizing the returns. One should not, however, be deluded into believing that he 
can always attain the projected annual return. A 6-month write that offers a 6% 
return annualizes to 12%. But if one establishes such a position, all that he can 
achieve is 6% in 6 months. One does not really know for sure that 6 months from now 
there will be another position available that will provide 6% over the next 6 months. 
The deeper that the written option is in-the-money, the higher the probability 
that the return if unchanged will actually be attained. In an in-the-money situation, 
recall that the return if unchanged is the same as the return if exercised. Both would 
be attained unless the stock fell below the striking price by expiration. Thus, for an in­
the-money write, the projected return is attained if the stock rises, remains unchanged, 
or even falls slightly by the time the option expires. Higher potential returns are avail­
able for out-of-the-money writes if the stock rises. However, should the stock remain 
the same or decline in price, the out-of-the-money write will generally underperform 
the in-the-money write. This is why the return if unchanged is a good comparison. 
DOWNSIDE PROTECTION 
Downside protection is more difficult to quantify than projected returns are. As men­
tioned earlier, the percentage of downside protection is often used as a measure. This 

===== PDF PAGE 82 =====
60 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
is somewhat misleading, however, since the more volatile stocks will always offer a 
large percentage of downside protection (their premiums are higher). The difficulty 
arises in trying to decide if 10% protection on a volatile stock is better than or worse 
than, say, 6% protection on a less volatile stock. There are mathematical ways to 
quantify this, but because of the relatively advanced nature of the computations 
involved, they are not discussed until later in the text, in Chapter 28 on mathemati­
cal applications. 
Rather than go into involved mathematical calculations, many covered writers 
use the percentage of downside protection and will only consider writes that offer a 
certain minimum level of protection, say 10%. Although this is not exact, it does 
strive to ensure that one has minimal downside protection in a covered write, as well 
as an acceptable return. A standard figure that is often used is the 10% level of pro­
tection. Alternatively, one may also require that the write be a certain percent in-the­
money, say 5%. This is just another way of arriving at the same concept. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRATEGY 
In a conservative option writing strategy, one should be looking for minimum returns 
if unchanged of 1 % per month, with downside protection of at least 10%, as general 
guidelines. Employing such criteria automatically forces one to write in-the-money 
options in line with the total return concept. The overall position constructed by 
using such guidelines as these will be a relatively conservative position - regardless 
of the volatility of the underlying stock - since the levels of protection will be large 
but a reasonable return can still be attained. There is a danger, however, in using 
fixed guidelines, because market conditions change. In the early days of listed 
options, premiums were so large that virtually every at- or in-the-money covered 
write satisfied the foregoing criteria. However, now one should work with a ranked 
list of covered writing positions, or perhaps two lists. A daily computer ranking of 
either or both of the following categories would help establish the most attractive 
types of conservative covered writes. One list would rank, by annualized return, the 
writes that afford, as a minimum, the desired downside protection level, say 10%. 
The other list would rank, by percentage downside protection, all the writes that 
meet at least the minimum acceptable return if unchanged, say 12%. If premium lev­
els shrink and the lists become quite small on a daily basis, one might consider 
expanding the criteria to view more potential situations. On the other hand, if pre­
miums expand dramatically, one might consider using more restrictive criteria, to 
reduce the number of potential writing candidates. 
A different group of covered writers may favor a more aggressive strategy of out­
of-the-money writes. There is some mathematical basis to believe, in the long rnn, that 

===== PDF PAGE 83 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 61 
rrwderately out-of the-rrwney covered writes will peiform better than in-the-rrwney 
writes. In falling or static markets, any covered writer, even the more aggressive one, 
will outperform the stockowner who does not write calls. The out-of-the-money cov­
ered writer has more risk in such a market than the in-the-money writer does. But in 
a rising market, the out-of-the-money covered writer will not limit his returns as much 
as the in-the-money writer will. As stated earlier, the out-of-the-money writer's per­
formance will more closely follow the performance of the underlying stock; that is, it 
will be more volatile on a quarter-by-quarter basis. 
There is merit in either philosophy. The in-the-money writes appeal to those 
investors looking to earn a relatively consistent, moderate rate of return. This is the 
total return concept. These investors are generally concerned with preservation of 
capital, thus striving for the greater levels of downside protection available from in­
the-money writes. On the other hand, some investors prefer to strive for higher 
potential returns through writing out-of-the-money calls. These more aggressive 
investors are willing to accept more downside risk in their covered writing positions 
in exchange for the possibility of higher returns should the underlying stock rise in 
price. These investors often rely on a bullish research opinion on a stock in order to 
select out-of-the-money writes. 
Although the type of covered writing strategy pursued is a matter of personal 
philosophy, it would seem that the benefits of in-the-money strategy- more consis­
tent returns and lessened risk than stock ownership will normally provide - would 
lead the portfolio manager or less aggressive investor toward this strategy. If the 
investor is interested in achieving higher returns, some of the strategies to be pre­
sented later in the book may be able to provide higher returns with less risk than can 
out-of-the-money covered writing. 
The final important consideration in selecting a covered write is the underlying 
stock itself. One does not necessarily have to be bullish on the underlying stock to 
take a covered writing position. As long as one does not foresee a potential decline in 
the underlying stock, he can feel free to establish the covered writing position. It is 
generally best if one is neutral or slightly bullish on the underlying stock. If one is 
bearish, he should not take a covered writing position on that stock, regardless of the 
levels of protection that can be obtained. An even broader statement is that one 
should not establish a covered write on a stock that he does not want to own. Some 
individual investors may have qualms about buying stock they feel is too volatile for 
them. Impartially, if the return and protection are adequate, the characteristics of the 
total position are different from those of the underlying stock. However, it is still true 
that one should not invest in positions that he considers too risky for his portfolio, nor 
should one establish a covered write just because he likes a particular stock. If the 

===== PDF PAGE 84 =====
62 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
potential return is unchanged or levels of downside protection do not meet one's cri­
teria, the write should not be established. 
The covered writing strategist strives for a balance between acceptable returns 
and downside protection. He rejects situations that do not meet his criteria in either 
category and rejects stocks on which he is bearish. The resulting situations will prob­
ably fulfill the objectives of a conservative covered writing program: increased income, 
protection, and less variability of results on a less volatile investment portfolio. 
WRITING AGAINST STOCK ALREADY OWNED 
Establishing covered writing positions against stock that has previously been pur­
chased involves other factors. It is often the case that an investor owns stock that 
has listed options trading, but feels that the returns from writing are too low in 
comparison to other covered writes that simultaneously exist in the marketplace. 
This opinion may be valid, but often arises from the fact that the investor has seen 
a computer-generated list showing returns on his stock as being low in comparison 
to similarly priced stocks. One should note that such lists generally assume that 
stock is bought in order to establish the covered write; the returns are usually not 
computed and published for writing against stock already held. It may be the case 
that the commission costs for selling one stock and investing in another may alter 
the returns so substantially that one would be better off to write against the shares 
of stock initially held. 
Example: An investor owns XYZ stock and is comparing it against AAA stock for 
writing purposes. If AAA is more volatile than XYZ, the current prices might appear 
as follows: 
Stock 
XYZ: 50 
AAA:50 
Oct 50 Coll 
4 
6 
Table 2-17 summarizes the computation of the return if exercised as one might 
see it listed on a daily or weekly summary of available covered writing returns. 
Assume that 500 shares are being written against, that XYZ will pay 50 cents per 
share in dividends while AAA pays none during the life of the call, and that the 
October 50 is a 6-month call. 
Without going into as much detail, the other significant aspects of these two 
writes are: 

===== PDF PAGE 85 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
Return if exercised - margin 
Downside break-even point cash 
Downside break-even point - margin 
XYZ 
7.9% 
46.3 
47.6 
63 
AAA 
16.2% 
44.9 
46.1 
Seeing these calculations, the XYZ stockholder may feel that it is not advisable to 
write against his stock, or he may even be tempted to sell XYZ and buy AAA in order 
to establish a covered write. Either of these actions could be a mistake. 
First, he should compute what his returns would be, at current prices, from 
writing against the XYZ he already owns. Since the stock is already held, no stock buy 
commissions would be involved. This would reduce the net investment shown below 
by the stock purchase commissions, or $345, giving a total net investment (cash) of 
$23,077. In theory, the stockholder does not really make an investment per se; after 
all, he already owns the stock. However, for the purposes of computing returns, an 
investment figure is necessary. This reduction in the net investment will increase his 
profit by the same amount - $345 - thus, bringing the profit up to $1,828. 
Consequently, the return if exercised (cash) wpuld be 7.9% on XYZ stock already 
held. On margin, the return would increase to 11.3% after eliminating purchase com­
missions. This return, assumed to be for a 6-month period, is well in excess of 1 % per 
TABLE 2-17. 
Summary of covered writing returns, XYZ and AAA. 
XYZ AAA 
Buy 500 shares at 50 $25,000 $25,000 
Plus stock commissions + 345 + 345 
Less option premiums received - 2,000 - 3,000 
Plus option sale commissions + 77 + 91 
Net investment-cash $23,422 $22,436 
Sell 500 shares at 50 $25,000 $25,000 
Less stock sale commissions 345 345 
Dividend received + 250 0 
Less net investment - 23,422 - 22,436 
Net profit $ 1,483 $ 2,219 
Return if exercised-cash 6.3% 9.9% 

===== PDF PAGE 86 =====
' 64 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
month, the level nominally used for acceptable covered writes. Thus, the investor 
who already owns stock may inadvertently be overlooking a potentially attractive cov­
ered write because he has not computed the returns excluding the stock purchase 
commission on his current stock holding. 
It could conceivably be an even more extreme oversight for the investor to 
switch from XYZ to AAA for writing purposes. The investor may consider making this 
switch because he thinks that he could substantially increase his return, from 6.3% to 
9.9% for the 6-month period, as shown in Table 2-17 comparing the two writes. 
However, the returns are not truly comparable because the investor already 
owns XYZ. To make the switch, he would first have to spend $345 in stock commis­
sions to sell his XYZ, thereby reducing his profits on AAA by $345. Referring again to 
the preceding detailed breakdown of the return if exercised, the profit on AAA would 
then decline to $1,874 on the investment of $22,436, a return if exercised (cash) of 
8.4%. On margin, the comparable return from switching stocks would drop to 14.8%. 
The real comparison in returns from writing against these two stocks should be 
made in the following manner. The return from writing against XYZ that is already 
held should be compared with the return from writing against AAA after switching 
fromXYZ: 
Return if exercised - cash 
Return if exercised - margin 
XYZ Already Held 
7.9% 
11.3% 
Switch from XYZ to AAA 
8.4% 
14.8% 
Each investor must decide for himself whether it is worth this much smaller 
increase in return to switch to a more volatile stock that pays a smaller dividend. He 
can, of course, only make this decision by making the true comparison shown imme­
diately above as opposed to the first comparison, which assumed that both stocks had 
to be purchased in order to establish the covered write. 
The same logic applies in situations in which an investor has been doing cov­
ered writing. If he owns stock on which an option has expired, he will have to decide 
whether to write against the same stock again or to sell the stock and buy a new stock 
for covered writing purposes. Generally, the investor should write against the stock 
already held. This justifies the method of computation of return if unchanged for out­
of-the-money writes and also the computation of downside break-even points in 
which a stock sale commission was not charged. That is, the writer would not nor­
mally sell his stock after an option has expired worthless, but would instead write 
another option against the same stock. It is thus acceptable to make these computa­
tions without including a stock sales commission. 

===== PDF PAGE 87 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
A WORD OF CAUTION 
65 
The stockholder who owns stock from a previous purchase and later contemplates 
writing calls against that stock must be aware of his situation. He must realize and 
accept the fact that he might lose his stock via assignment. If he is determined to 
retain ownership of the stock, he may have to buy back the written option at a loss 
should the underlying stock increase in price. In essence, he is limiting the stock's 
upside potential. If a stockholder is going to be frustrated and disappointed when he 
is not fully participating during a rally in his stock, he should not write a call in the 
first place. Perhaps he could utilize the incremental return concept of covered writ­
ing, a topic covered later in this chapter. 
As stressed earlier, a covered writing strategy involves viewing the stock and 
option as a total position. It is not a strategy wherein the investor is a stockholder who 
also trades options against his stock position. If the stockholder is selling the calls 
because he thinks the stock is going to decline in price and the call trade itself will be 
profitable, he may be putting himself in a tenuous position. Thinking this way, he will 
probably be satisfied only if he makes a profit on the call trade, regardless of the 
unrealized result in the underlying stock. This sort of philosophy is contrary to a cov­
ered writing strategy philosophy. Such an investor - he is really becoming a trader 
should carefully review his motives for writing the call and anticipate his reaction if 
the stock rises substantially in price after the call has been written. 
In essence, writing calls against stock that you have no intention of selling is 
tantamount to writing naked calls! If one is going to be extremely frustrated, perhaps 
even experiencing sleepless nights, if his stock rises above the strike price of the call 
that he has written, then he is experiencing trials and tribulations much as the writer 
of a naked call would if the same stock move occurred. This is an unacceptable level 
of emotional worry for a true covered writing strategist. 
Think about it. If you have some very low-cost-basis stock that you don't really 
want to sell, and then you sell covered calls against that stock, what do you wish will 
happen? Most certainly you wish that the options will expire worthless (i.e., that the 
stock won't get called away) - exactly what a naked writer wishes for. 
The problems can be compounded if the stock rises, and one then decides to 
roll these calls. Rather than spend a small debit to close out a losing position, an 
investor may attempt to roll to more distant expiration months and higher strike 
prices in order to keep bringing in credits. Eventually, he runs out of room as the 
lower strikes disappear, and he has to either sell some stock or pay a big debit to buy 
back the written calls. So, if the underlying stock continues to run higher, the writer 
suffers emotional devastation as he attempts to "fight the market." There have been 
some classic cases of Murphy's law whereby people have covered the calls at a big 

===== PDF PAGE 88 =====
66 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
debit rather than let their "untouchable" stock be called away, just before the stock 
itself or the stock market collapsed. 
One should be very cautious about writing covered calls against stocks that he 
doesn't intend to sell. If one feels that he cannot sell his stock, for whatever reason -
tax considerations, emotional ties, etc. - he really should not sell covered calls against 
it. Perhaps buying a protective put ( discussed in a later chapter) would be a better 
strategy for such a stockholder. 
DIVERSIFYING RETURN AND PROTECTION 
IN A COVERED WRITE 
FUNDAMENTAL DIVERSIFICATION TECHNIQUES 
Quite clearly, the covered writing strategist would like to have as much of a combina­
tion of high potential returns and adequate downside protection as he can obtain. 
Writing an out-of-the-money call will offer higher returns if exercised, but it usually 
affords only a modest amount of downside protection. On the other hand, writing an 
in-the-money call will provide more downside cushion but offers a lower return if 
exercised. For some strategists, this diversification is realized in practice by writing 
out-of-the-money calls on some stocks and in-the-moneys on other stocks. There is no 
guarantee that writing in this manner on a list of diversified stocks will produce supe­
rior results. One is still forced to pick the stocks that he expects will perform better 
(for out-of-the-money writing), and that is difficult to do. Moreover, the individual 
investor may not have enough funds available to diversify into many such situations. 
There is, however, another alternative to obtaining diversification of both returns and 
downside protection in a covered writing situation. 
The writer may often do best by writing half of his position against in-the-rrwn­
eys and half against out-of the-rrwneys on the same stock. This is especially attractive 
for a stock whose out-of-the-money calls do not appear to provide enough downside 
protection, and at the same time, whose in-the-money calls do not provide quite 
enough return. By writing both options, the writer may be able to acquire the return 
and protection diversification that he is seeking. 
Example: The following prices exist for 6-month calls: 
XYZ common stock, 42; 
XYZ April 40 call, 4; and 
XYZ April 45 call, 2. 

===== PDF PAGE 89 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 67 
The writer wishing to establish a covered write against XYZ common stock may like 
the protection afforded by the April 40 call, but may not find the return particularly 
attractive. He may be able to improve his return by writing April 45's against part of 
his position. Assume the writer is considering buying 1,000 shares of XYZ. Table 2-18 
compares the attributes of writing the out-of-the-money (April 45) only, or of writing 
only the in-the-money (April 40), or of writing 5 of each. The table is based on a cash 
covered write, but returns and protection would be similar for a margin write. 
Commissions are included in the figures. 
It is easily seen that the "combined" write - half of the position against the April 
40's and the other half against the April 45's - offers the best balance of return and 
protection. The in-the-money call, by itself, provides over 10% downside protection, 
but the 5% return if exercised is less than 1 % per month. Thus, one might not want 
to write April 40's against his entire position, because the potential return is small. At 
the same time, the April 45's, if written against the entire stock position, would pro­
vide for an attractive return if exercised (over 2% per month) but offer only 5% down­
side protection. The combined write, which has the better features of both options, 
offers over 8% return if exercised (11h% per month) and affords over 8% downside 
protection. By writing both calls, the writer has potentially solved the problems inher­
ent in writing entirely out-of-the-moneys or entirely in-the-moneys. The "combined" 
write frees the covered writer from having to initially take a bearish (in-the-money 
write) or bullish (out-of-the-money write) posture on the stock ifhe does not want to. 
This is often necessary on a low-volatility stock trading between striking prices. 
TABLE 2-18. 
Attributes of various writes. 
Buy 1,000 XYZ and sell 
Return if exercised 
Re~rn if unchanged 
Percent protection 
In-the-Money 
Write 
10 April 40's 
5.1% 
5.1% 
10.5% 
Out-of-the-Money 
Write 
l O April 45's 
12.2% 
6.0% 
5.7% 
Write 
Both Calls 
5 April 40's and 
5 April 45's 
8.4% 
5.4% 
8.1% 
For those who prefer a graphic representation, the profit graph shown in Figure 
2-2 compares the combined write of both calls with either the in-the-money write or 
the out-of-the-money write (dashed lines). It can be observed that all three choices 
are equal if XYZ is near 42 at expiration; all three lines intersect there. 

===== PDF PAGE 90 =====
68 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
FIGURE 2-2. 
Comparison: combined write vs. in-the-money write and out-of-the­
money write. 
Out-of-the-Money Write 
, 
.-------► ,,, Combined Write , 
/ In-the-Money Write 
-----------➔ 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Since this technique can be useful in providing diversification between protec­
tion and return, not only for an individual position but for a large part of a portfolio, 
it may be useful to see exactly how to compute the potential returns and break-even 
points. Tables 2-19 and 2-20 calculate the return if exercised and the return if 
unchanged using the prices from the previous example. Assume XYZ will pay $1 per 
share in dividends before April expiration. 
Note that the profit calculations are similar to those described in earlier sec­
tions, except that now there are two prices for stock sales since there are two options 
involved. In the "return if exercised" section, half of the stock is sold at 45 and half is 
sold at 40. The "return if unchanged" calculation is somewhat more complicated now, 
TABLE 2-19. 
Net investment-cash account. 
Buy 1,000 XYZ at 42 
Plus stock commissions 
Less options premiums: 
Sell 5 April 40's at 4 
Sell 5 April 45's at 2 
Plus total option commissions 
Net investment 
+ 
$42,000 
460 
- 2,000 
1,000 
+ 140 
$39,600 

===== PDF PAGE 91 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
TABLE 2-20. 
Net return-cash account. 
Return If Exercised 
Sell 500 XYZ at 45 $22,500 
Sell 500 XYZ at 40 20,000 
Less total stock sale 
commissions 560 
Plus dividends ($1 /share) + 1,000 
Less net investment - 39,600 
Net profit if exercised $ 3,340 
Return if exercised = 3,340 = 8_4% 
(cash) 39,600 
69 
Return If Unchanged 
Unchanged stock value (500 
shares at 42) $21,000 
Sell 500 at 40 + 20,000 
Commissions on sale at 40 280 
Plus dividends ($1 /share) . + 1,000 
Less net investment - 39,600 
Net profit if unchanged $ 2, 120 
Return if unchanged = 2, 120 = 5 _4% 
(cash) 39,600 
because half of the stock will be called away if it remains unchanged (the in-the­
money portion) whereas the other half will not. This is consistent with the method of 
calculating the return if unchanged that was introduced previously. 
The break-even point is calculated as before. The "total stock cost to expiration" 
would be the net investment of $39,600 less the $1,000 received in dividends. This is 
a total of $38,600. On a per-share basis, then, the break-even point of 38.6 is 8.1 % 
below the current stock price of 42. Thus, the amount of percentage downside pro­
tection is 8.1 %. 
The foregoing calculations clearly demonstrate that the returns on the "com­
bined" write are not exactly the averages of the in-the-money and out-of-the-money 
returns, because of the different commission calculations at various stock prices. 
However, if one is working with a computer-generated list and does not want to both­
er to calculate exactly the return on the combined write, he can arrive at a relatively 
close approximation by averaging the returns for the in-the-money write and the out­
of-the-money write. 
OTHER DIVERSIFICATION TECHNIQUES 
Holders of large positions in a particular stock may want even more diversification 
than can be provided by writing against two different striking prices. Institutions, 
pension funds, and large individual stockholders may fall into this category. It is often 
advisable for such large stockholders to diversify their writing over time as well as 
over at least two striking prices. By diversifying over time - for example, writing one-

===== PDF PAGE 92 =====
70 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
third of the position against near-term calls, one-third against middle-term calls, and 
the remaining third against long-term calls - one can gain several benefits. First, all 
of one's positions need not be adjusted at the same time. This includes either having 
the stock called away or buying back one written call and selling another. Moreover, 
one is not subject only to the level of option premiums that exist at the time one 
series of calls expires. For example, if one writes only 9-month calls and then rolls 
them over when they expire, he may unnecessarily be subjecting himself to the 
potential of lower returns. If option premium levels happen to be low when it is time 
for this 9-month call writer to sell more calls, he will be establishing a less-than-opti­
mum write for up to 9 months. By spreading his writing out over time, he would, at 
worst, be subjecting only one-third of his holding to the low-premium write. 
Hopefully, premiums would expand before the next eXpiration 3 months later, and he 
would then be getting a relatively better premium on the next third of his portfolio. 
There is an important aside here: The individual or relatively small investor who 
owns only enough stock to write one series of options should generally not write the 
longest-term calls for this very reason. He may not be obtaining a particularly attrac­
tive level of premiums, but may feel he is forced to retain the position until expira­
tion. Thus, he could be in a relatively poor write for as long as 9 months. Finally, this 
type of diversification may also lead to having calls at various striking prices as· the 
market fluctuates cyclically. All of one's stock is not necessarily committed at one 
price if this diversification technique is employed. 
This concludes the discussion of how to establish a covered writing position 
against stock. Covered writes against other types of securities are described later. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
Establishing a covered write, or any option position for that matter, is only part of the 
strategist's job. Once the position has been taken, it must be monitored closely so that 
adjustments may be made should the stock drop too far in price. Moreover, even if 
the stock remains relatively unchanged, adjustments will need to be made as the writ­
ten call approaches expiration. 
Some writers take no follow-up action at all, preferring to let a stock be called 
away if it rises above the striking price at the expiration of the option, or preferring 
to let the original expire worthless if the stock is below the strike. These are not 
always optimum actions; there may be much more decision making involved. 
Follow-up action can be divided into three general categories: 

===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 71 
1. protective action to take if the stock drops, 
2. aggressive action to take when the stock rises, or 
3. action to avoid assignment if the time premium disappears from an in-the-money 
call. 
There may be times when one decides to close the entire position before expiration 
or to let the stock be called away. These cases are discussed as well. 
PROTECTIVE ACTION IF THE UNDERLYING STOCK DECLINES IN PRICE 
The covered writer who does not take protective action in the face of a relatively sub­
stantial drop in price by the underlying stock may be risking the possibility of large 
losses. Since covered writing is a strategy with limited profit potential, one should 
also take care to limit losses. Otherwise, one losing position can negate several win­
ning positions. The simplest form of follow-up action in a decline is to merely close 
out the position. This might be done if the stock declines by a certain percentage, or 
if the stock falls below a technical support level. Unfortunately, this method of defen­
sive action may prove to be an inferior one. The investor will often do better to con­
tinue to sell more time value in the form of additional option premiums. 
Follow-up action is generally taken by buying back the call that was originally 
written and then writing another call, with a different striking price and/or expiration 
date, in its place. Any adjustment of this sort is referred to as a rolling action. When 
the underlying stock drops in price, one generally buys back the original call - pre­
sumably at a profit since the underlying stock has declined - and then sells a call with 
a lower striking price. This is known as rolling down, since the new option has a lower 
striking price. 
Example: The covered writing position described as "buy XYZ at 51, sell the XYZ 
January 50 call at 6" would have a maximum profit potential at expiration of 5 points. 
Downside protection is 6 points down to a stock price of 45 at expiration. These fig­
ures do not include commissions, but for the purposes of an elementary example, the 
commissions will be ignored. 
If the stock begins to decline in price, taking perhaps two months to fall to 45, 
the following option prices might exist: 
XYZ common, 45; 
XYZ January 50 call, l; and 
XYZ January 45 call, 4. 

===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
72 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
• 
The covered writer of the January 50 would, at this time, have a small unrealized loss 
of one point in his overall position: His loss on the common stock is 6 points, but he 
has a 5-point gain in the January 50 call. (This demonstrates that prior to expiration, 
a loss occurs at the "break-even" point.) If the stock should continue to fall from 
these levels, he could have a larger loss at expiration. The call, selling for one point, 
only affords one more point of downside protection. If a further stock price drop is 
anticipated, additional downside protection can be obtained by rolling down. In this 
example, if one were to buy back the January 50 call at 1 and sell the January 45 at 
4, he would be rolling down. This would increase his protection by another three 
points - the credit generated by buying the 50 call at 1 and selling the 45 call at 4. 
Hence, his downside break-even point would be 42 after rolling down. 
Moreover, if the stock were to remain unchanged - that is, if XYZ were exactly 
45 at January expiration - the writer would make an additional $300. If he had not 
rolled down, the most additional income that he could make, if XYZ remained 
unchanged, would be the remaining $100 from the January 50 call. So rolling down 
gives more downside protection against a further drop in stock price and may also 
produce additional income if the stock price stabilizes. 
In order to more exactly evaluate the overall effect that was obtained by rolling 
down in this example, one can either compute a profit table (Table 2-21) or draw a 
net profit graph (Figure 2-3) that compares the original covered write with the 
rolled-down position. 
Note that the rolled-down position has a smaller maximum profit potential than 
the original position did. This is because, by rolling down to a January 45 call, the 
writer limits his profits anywhere above 45 at expiration. He has committed himself 
to sell stock 5 points lower than the original position, which utilized a January 50 call 
and thus had limited profits above 50. Rolling down generally reduces the maximum 
TABLE 2·21. 
Profit table. 
XYZ Price at Profit from Profit from 
Expiration January 50 Write Rolled Position 
40 -$500 -200 
42 - 300 0 
45 0 +300 
48 + 300 +300 
50 + 500 +300 
60 + 500 +300 

===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
FIGURE 2-3. 
Comparison: original covered write vs. rolled-down write. 
+$500 
c: +$300 
0 
~ 
]-
iii 
en en 
0 ...J 
5 
-e a. 
$0 
Original Write 
Rolled-Down Write 
50 
Stock Price at Expiration 
73 
profit potential of the covered write. Limiting the maximum profit may be a second­
ary consideration, however, when a stock is breaking downward. Additional downside 
protection is often a more pressing criterion in that case. 
Anywhere below 45 at expiration, the rolled-down position does $300 better 
than the original position, because of the $300 credit generated from rolling down. 
In fact, the rolled-down position will outperform the original position even if the 
stock rallies back to, but not above, a price of 48. At 48 at expiration, the two posi­
tions are equal, both producing a $300 profit. If the stock should reverse direction 
and rally back above 48 by expiration, the writer would have been better off not to 
have rolled down. All these facts are clear from Table 2-21 and Figure 2-3. 
Consequently, the only case in which it does not pay to roll down is the one in 
which the stock experiences a reversal - a rise in price after the initial drop. The 
selection of where to roll down is important, because rolling down too early or at an 
inappropriate price could limit the returns. Technical support levels of the stock are 
often useful in selecting prices at which to roll down. If one rolls down after techni­
cal support has been broken, the chances of being caught in a stock-price-reversal 
situation would normally be reduced. 
The above example is rather simplistic; in actual practice, more complicated sit­
uations may arise, such as a sudden and fairly steep decline in price by the underly­
ing stock. This may present the writer with what is called a locked-in loss. This means, 
simply, that there is no option to which the writer can roll down that will provide him 

===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
74 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
with enough premium to realize any profit if the stock were then called away at expi­
ration. These situations arise more commonly on lower-priced stocks, where the 
striking prices are relatively far apart in percentage terms. Out-of-the-money writes 
are more susceptible to this problem than are in-the-money writes. Although it is not 
emotionally satisfying to be in an investment position that cannot produce a profit -
at least for a limited period of time - it may still be beneficial to roll down to protect 
as much of the stock price decline as possible. 
Example: For the covered write described as "buy XYZ at 20, sell the January 20 call 
at 2," the stock unexpectedly drops very quickly to 16, and the following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 16; 
XYZ January 20 call,½; and 
XYZ January 15 call, 2½. 
The covered writer is faced with a difficult choice. He currently has an unrealized 
loss of 2½ points - a 4-point losson the stock which is partially offset by a 1 ½-point 
gain on the January 20 call. This represents a fairly substantial percentage loss on his 
investment in a short period of time. He could do nothing, hoping for the stock to 
recover its loss. Unfortunately, this may prove to be wishful thinking. 
If he considers rolling down, he will not be excited by what he sees. Suppose 
that the writer wants to roll down from the January 20 to the January 15. He would 
thus buy the January 20 at ½ and sell the January 15 at 2½, for a net credit of 2 
points. By rolling down, he is obligating himself to sell his stock at 15, the striking 
price of the January 15 call. Suppose XYZ were above 15 in January and were called 
away. How would the writer do? He would lose 5 points on his stock, since he origi­
nally bought it at 20 and is selling it at 15. This 5-point loss is substantially offset by 
his option profits, which amount to 4 points: 1 ½ points of profit on the January 20, 
sold at 2 and bought back at ½, plus the 2½ points received from the sale of the 
January 15. However, his net result is a 1-point loss, since he lost 5 points on the stock 
and made only 4 points on the options. Moreover, this 1-point loss is the best that he 
can hope for! This is true because, as has been demonstrated several times, a covered 
writing position makes its maximum profit anywhere above the striking price. Thus, 
by rolling down to the 15 strike, he has limited the position severely, to the extent of 
"locking in a loss." 
Even considering what has been shown about this loss, it is still correct for this 
writer to roll down to the January 15. Once the stock has fallen to 16, there is noth­
ing anybody can do about the unrealized losses. However, if the writer rolls down, he 
can prevent the losses from accumulating at a faster rate. In fact, he will do better by 

===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 75 
rolling down if the stock drops further, remains unchanged, or even rises slightly. 
Table 2-22 and Figure 2-4 compare the original write with the rolled-down position. 
It is clear from the figure that the rolled-down position is locked into a loss. However, 
the rolled-down position still outperforms the original position unless the stock ral­
lies back above 17 by expiration. Thus, if the stock continues to fall, if it remains 
unchanged, or even if it rallies less than 1 point, the rolled-down position actually 
outperforms the original write. It is for this reason that the writer is taking the most 
logical action by rolling down, even though to do so locks in a loss. 
TABLE 2-22. 
Profits of original write and rolled position. 
Stock Price at Profit from 
Expiration January 20 Write 
10 -$800 
15 - 300 
18 0 
20 + 200 
25 + 200 
FIGURE 2-4. 
Comparison: original write vs. 
11
locked-in loss." 
c: +$200 Original Write 
~ 
t 
«i 
~ 
o -$100 
~ a.. 
15 20 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Profit from 
Rolled Position 
-$600 
- 100 
- 100 
- 100 
- 100 

===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
76 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Technical analysis may be able to provide a little help for the writer faced with 
the dilemma of rolling down to lock in a loss or else holding onto a position that has 
no further downside protection. IfXYZ has broken a support level or important trend 
line, it is added evidence for rolling down. In our example, it is difficult to imagine 
the case in which a $20 stocksuddenly drops to become a $16 stock without sub­
stantial harm to its technical picture. Nevertheless, if the charts should show that 
there is support at 15½ or 16, it may be worth the writer's while to wait and see if 
that support level can hold before rolling down. 
Perhaps the best way to avoid having to lock in losses would be to establish posi­
tions that are less likely to become such a problem. In-the-money covered writes on 
higher-priced stocks that have a moderate amount of volatility will rarely force the 
writer to lock in a loss by rolling down. Of course, any stock, should it fall far enough 
and fast enough, could force the writer to lock in a loss if he has to roll down two or 
thr..ee times in a fairly short time span. However, the higher-priced stock has striking 
prices that are much closer together (in percentages); it thus presents the writer with 
the opportunity to utilize a new option with a lower striking price much sooner in the 
decline of the stock. Also, higher volatility should help in generating large enough 
premiums that substantial portions of the stock's decline can be hedged by rolling 
down. Conversely, low-priced stocks, especially nonvolatile ones, often present the 
most severe problems for the covered writer when they decline in price. 
A related point concerning order entry can be inserted here. When one simul­
taneously buys one call and sells another, he is executing a spread. Spreads in gener­
al are discussed at length later. However, the covered writer should be aware that 
whenever he rolls his position, the order can be placed as a spread order. This will 
normally help the writer to obtain a better price execution. 
AN ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF ROLLING DOWN 
There is another alternative that the covered writer can use to attempt to gain some 
additional downside protection without necessarily having to lock in a loss. Basically, 
the writer rolls down only part of his covered writing position. 
Example: One thousand shares of XYZ were bought at 20 and 10 January 20 calls 
were sold at 2 points each. As before, the stock falls to 16, with the following prices: 
XYZ January 20 call, ½; and XYZ January 15 call, 2½. As was demonstrated in the last 
section, if the writer were to roll all 10 calls down from the January 20 to the January 
15, he would be locking in a loss. Although there may be some justification for this 
action, the writer would naturally rather not have to place himself in such a position. 
One can attempt to achieve some balance between added downside protection 
and upward profit potential by rolling down only part of the calls. In this example, 

===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 77 
the writer would buy back only 5 of the January 20's and sell 5 January 15 calls. He 
would then have this position: 
long 1,000 XYZ at 20; 
short 5 XYZ January 20's at 2; 
short 5 XYZ January 15's at 2½; and 
realized gain, $750 from 5 January 20's. 
This strategy is generally referred to a partial roll-down, in which only a portion of 
the original calls is rolled, as opposed to the more conventional complete roll-down. 
Analyzing the partially rolled position makes it clear that the writer no longer locks 
in a loss. 
IfXYZ rallies back above 20, the writer would, at expiration, sell 500 XYZ at 20 
(breaking even) and 500 at 15 (losing $2,500 on this portion). He would make $1,000 
from the five January 20's held until expiration, plus $1,250 from the five January 15's, 
plus the $750 of realized gain from the January 20's that were rolled down. This 
amounts to $3,000 worth of option profits and $2,500 worth of stock losses, or an 
overall net gain of $500, less commissions. Thus, the partial roll-down offers the 
writer a chance to make some profit if the stock rebounds. Obviously, the partial roll­
down will not provide as much downside protection as the complete roll-down does, 
but it does give more protection than not rolling down at all. To see this, compare the 
results given in Table 2-23 if XYZ is at 15 at expiration. 
TABLE 2-23. 
Stock at 15 at expiration. 
Strategy 
Original position 
Partial roll-down 
Complete roll-down 
Stock Loss 
-$5,000 
- 5,000 
- 5,000 
Option 
Profit Total Loss 
+$2,000 -$3,000 
+ 3,000 - 2,000 
+ 4,000 - 1,000 
In summary, the covered writer who would like to roll down, but who does not 
want to lock in a loss or who feels the stock may rebound somewhat before expira­
tion, should consider rolling down only part of his position. If the stock should con­
tinue to drop, making it evident that there is little hope of a strong rebound back to 
the original strike, the rest of the position can then be rolled down as well. 

===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
78 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
UTILIZING DIFFERENT EXPIRATION SERIES WHEN ROLLING DOWN 
In the examples thus far, the same expiration month has been used whenever rolling­
down action was taken. In actual practice, the writer may often want to use a more 
distant expiration month when rolling down and, in some cases, he may even want to 
use a nearer expiration month. 
The advantage of rolling down into a more distant expiration series is that more 
actual points of protection are received. This is a common action to take when the 
underlying stock has become somewhat worrisome on a technical or fundamental 
basis. However, since rolling down reduces the maximum profit potential - a fact that 
has been demonstrated several times - every roll-down should not be made to a more 
distant expiration series. By utilizing a longer-term call when rolling down, one is 
reducing his maximum profit potential for a longer period of time. Thus, the longer­
term·call should be used only if the writer has grown concerned over the stock's capa­
bility to hold current price levels. The partial roll-down strategy is particularly 
amenable to rolling down to a longer-term call since, by rolling down only part of the 
position, one has already left the door open for profits if the stock should rebound. 
Therefore, he can feel free to avail himself of the maximum protection possible in the 
part of his position that is rolled down. 
The writer who must roll down to lock in a loss, possibly because of circum­
stances beyond his control, such as a sudden fall in the price of the underlying stock, 
may actually want to roll down to a near-term option. This allows him to make back 
the available time premium in the short-term call in the least time possible. 
Example: A writer buys XYZ at 19 and sells a 6-month call for 2 points. Shortly there­
after, however, bad news appears concerning the common stock and XYZ falls quick­
ly to 14. At that time, the following prices exist for the calls with the striking price 15: 
XYZ common, 14: 
near-term call, l; 
middle-term call, 1 ½; and 
far-term call, 2. 
If the writer rolls down into any of these three calls, he will be locking in a loss. 
Therefore, the best strategy may be to roll down into the near-term call, planning to 
capture one point of time premium in 3 months. In this way, he will be beginning to 
work himself out of the loss situation by availing himself of the most potential time 
premium decay in the shortest period of time. When the near-term call expires 
3 months from now, he can reassess the situation to decide if he wants to write 

===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 79 
another near-term call to continue taking in short-term premiums, or perhaps write 
a long-term call at that time. 
When rolling down into the near-term call, one is attempting to return to a 
potentially profitable situation in the shortest period of time. By writing short-term 
calls one or two times, the writer will eventually be able to reduce his stock cost near­
er to 15 in the shortest time period. Once his stock cost approaches 15, he can then 
write a long-term call with striking price 15 and return again to a potentially prof­
itable situation. He will no longer be locked into a loss. 
ACTION TO TAKE IF THE STOCK RISES 
A more pleasant situation for the covered writer to encounter is the one in which the 
underlying stock rises in price after the covered writing position has been estab­
lished. There are generally several choices available if this happens. The writer may 
decide to do nothing and to let his stock be called away, thereby making the return 
that he had hoped for when he established the position. On the other hand, if the 
underlying stock rises fairly quickly and the written call comes to parity, the writer 
may either close the position early or roll the call up. Each case is discussed. 
Example: Someone establishes a covered writing position by buying a stock at 50 and 
selling a 6-month call for 6 points. His maximum profit potential is 6 points anywhere 
above 50 at expiration, and his downside break-even point is 44. Furthermore, sup­
pose that the stock experiences a substantial rally and that it climbs to a price of 60 
in a short period of time. With the stock at 60, the July 50 might be selling for 11 
points and a July 60 might sell for as much as 7 points. Thus, the writer may consid­
er buying back the call that was originally written and rolling up to the call with a 
higher striking price. Table 2-24 summarizes the situation. 
TABLE 2·24. 
Comparison of original and current prices. 
Original Position Current Prices 
Buy XYZ at 50 XYZ common 60 
Sell XYZ July 50 call at 6 XYZ July 50 11 
XYZ Jul 60 7 
If the writer were to roll-up - that is, buy back the July 50 and sell the July 60 
- he would be increasing his profit potential. If XYZ were above 60 in July and were 
called away, he would make his option credits - 6 points from the July 50 plus 7 

===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
80 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
points from the July 60 - less the 11 points he paid to buy back the July 50. Thus, his 
option profits would amount to 2 points, which, added to the stock profit of 10 points, 
increases his maximum profit potential to 12 points anywhere above 60 at July expi­
ration. 
To increase his profit potential by such a large amount, the covered writer has 
given up some of his downside protection. The downside break-even point is always 
raised by the anwunt of the debit required to roll up. The debit required to roll up in 
this example is 4 points - buy the July 50 at 11 and sell the July 60 at 7. Thus, the 
break-even point is increased from the original 44 level to 48 after rolling up. There 
is another method of calculating the new profit potential and break-even point. In 
essence, the writer has raised his net stock cost to 55 by taking the realized 5-point 
loss on the July 50 call. Hence, he is essentially in a covered write whereby he has 
bought stock at 55 and has sold a July 60 call for 7. When expressed in this manner, 
it may be easier to see that the break-even point is 48 and the maximum profit poten­
tial, above 60, is 12 points. 
Note that when one rolls up, there is a debit incurred. That is, the investor must 
deposit additional cash into the covered writing position. This was not the case in 
rolling down, because credits were generated. Debits are considered by many 
investors to be a seriously negative aspect of rolling up, and they therefore prefer 
never to roll up for debits. Although the debit required to roll up may not be a neg­
ative aspect to every investor, it does translate directly into the fact that the break­
even point is raised and the writer is subjecting himself to a potential loss if the stock 
should pull back. It is often advantageous to roll to a more distant expiration when 
rolling up. This will reduce the debit required. 
The rolled-up position has a break-even point of 48. Thus, if XYZ falls back to 
48, the writer who rolled up will be left with no profit. However, if he had not rolled 
up, he would have made 4 points with XYZ at 48 at expiration in the original position. 
A further comparison can be made between the original position and the rolled-up 
position. The two are equal at July expiration at a stock price of 54; both have a prof­
it of 6 points with XYZ at 54 at July expiration. Thus, although it may appear attrac­
tive to roll up, one should determine the point at which the rolled-up position and 
the original position will be equal at expiration. If the writer believes XYZ could be 
subject to a 10% correction by expiration from 60 to 54 - certainly not out of the 
question for any stock - he should stay with his original position. 
Figure 2-5 compares the original position with the rolled-up position. Note that 
the break-even point has moved up from 44 to 48; the maximum profit potential has 
increased from 6 points to 12 points; and at expiration the two writes are equal, at 54. 
In summary, it can be said that rolling up increases one's profit potential but also 
exposes one to risk of loss if a stock price reversal should occur. Therefore, an ele-

===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 
FIGURE 2-5. 
Comparison: original write vs. rolled-up position. 
+$1,200 
Rolled-Up Write 
+$600 Original Write 
54 60 
Stock Price at Expiration 
81 
ment of risk is introduced as well as the possibility of increased rewards. Generally, 
it is not advisable to roll up if at least a 10% correction in the stock price cannot be 
withstood. One's initial goals for the covered write were set when the position was 
established. If the stock advances and these goals are being met, the writer should be 
very cautious about risking that profit. 
A SERIOUS BUT ALL-TOO-COMMON MISTAKE 
When an investor is overly intent on keeping his stock from being called away (per­
haps he is writing calls against stock that he really has no intention of selling), then 
he will normally roll up and/or forward to a more distant expiration month whenev­
er the stock rises to the strike of the written call. Most of these rolls incur a debit. If 
the stock is particularly strong, or if there is a strong bull market, these rolls for deb­
its begin to weigh heavily on the psychology of the covered writer. Eventually, he 
wears down emotionally and makes a mistake. He typically takes one of two roads: 
(1) He buys back all of the calls for a (large) debit, leaving the entire stock holding 
exposed to downside movements after it has risen dramatically in price and after he 

===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
82 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
has amassed a fairly large series of debits from previous rolls; or (2) he begins to sell 
some out-of-the-money naked puts to bring in credits to reduce the cost of continu­
ally rolling the calls up for debits. This latter action is even worse, because the entire 
position is now leveraged tremendously, and a sharp drop in the stock price may 
cause horrendous losses - perhaps enough to wipe out the entire account. As fate 
would have it, these mistakes are usually made when the stock is near a top in price. 
Any price decline after such a dramatic rise is usually a sharp and painful one. 
The best way to avoid this type of potentially serious mistake is to allow the 
stock to be called away at some point. Then, using the funds that are released, either 
establish a new position in another stock or perhaps even utilize another strategy for 
a while. If that is not feasible, at least avoid making a radical change in strategy after 
the stock has had a particularly strong rise. Leveraging the position through naked 
put sales on top of rolling the calls up for debits should expressly be avoided. 
The discussion to this point has been directed at rolling up before expiration. At 
or near expiration, when the time value premium has disappeared from the written 
call, one may have no choice but to write the next-higher striking price if he wants to 
retain his stock. This is discussed when we analyze action to take at or near expiration. 
If the underlying stock rises, one's choices are not necessarily limited to rolling 
up or doing nothing. As the stock increases in price, the written call will lose its time 
premium and may begin to trade near parity. The writer may decide to close the posi­
tion himself - perhaps well in advance of expiration - by buying back the written call 
and selling the stock out, hopefully near parity. 
Example: A customer originally bought XYZ at 25 and sold the 6-month July 25 for 
3 points - a net of 22. Now, three months later, XYZ has risen to 33 and the call is 
trading at 8 (parity) because it is so deeply in-the-money. At this point, the writer may 
want to sell the stock at 33 and buy back the call at 8, thereby realizing an effective 
net of 25 for the covered write, which is his maximum profit potential. This is cer­
tainly preferable to remaining in the position for three more months with no more 
profit potential available. The advantage of closing a parity covered write early is that 
one is realizing the maximum return in a shorter period than anticipated. He is there­
by increasing his annualized return on the position. Although it is generally to the 
cash writer's advantage (margin writers read on) to take such action, there are a few 
additional costs involved that he would not experience if he held the position until 
the call expired. First, the commission for the option purchase (buy-back) is an addi­
tional expense. Second, he will be selling his stock at a higher price than the striking 
price, so he may pay a slightly higher commission on that trade as well. If there is a 
dividend left until expiration, he will not be receiving that dividend if he closes the 

===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
Chapter 2: Covered Call Writing 83 
write early. Of course, if the trade was done in a margin account, the writer will be 
reducing the margin interest that he had planned to pay in the position, because the 
debit will be erased earlier. In most cases, the increased commissions are very small 
and the lost dividend is not significant compared to the increase in annualized return 
that one can achieve by closing the position early. However, this is not always true, 
and one should be aware of exactly what his costs are for closing the position early. 
Obviously, getting out of a covered writing position can be as difficult as estab­
lishing it. Therefore, one should place the order to close the position with his bro­
kerage firm's option desk, to be executed as a "net" order. The same traders who facil­
itate establishing covered writing positions at net prices will also facilitate getting out 
of the positions. One would normally place the order by saying that he wanted to sell 
his stock and buy the option "at parity" or, in the example, at "25 net." Just as it is 
often necessary to be in contact with both the option and stock exchanges to estab­
lish a position, so is it necessary to maintain the same contacts to renwve a position 
at parity. 
ACTION TO TAKE AT OR NEAR EXPIRATION 
As expiration nears and the time value premium disappears from a written call, the 
covered writer may often want to roll forward, that is, buy back the currently written 
call and sell a longer-term call with the same striking price. For an in-the-money call, 
the optimum time to roll forward is generally when the time value premium has com­
pletely disappeared from the call. For an out-of-the-money call, the correct time to 
move into the more distant option series is when the return offered by the near-term 
option is less than the return offered by the longer-term call. 
The in-the-money case is quite simple to analyze. As long as there is time pre­
mium left in the call, there is little risk of assignment, and therefore the writer is 
earning time premium by remaining with the original call. However, when the option 
begins to trade at parity or a discount, there arises a significant probability of exer­
cise by arbitrageurs. It is at this time that the writer should roll the in-the-money call 
forward. For example, if XYZ were offered at 51 and the July 50 call were bid at 1, 
the writer should be rolling forward into the October 50 or January 50 call. 
The out-of-the-money case is a little more difficult to handle, but a relatively 
straightforward analysis can be applied to facilitate the writer's decision. One can 
compute the return per day remaining in the written call and compare it to the net 
return per day from the longer-term call. If the longer-term call has a higher return, 
one should roll forward. 

===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
84 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Example: An investor previously entered a covered writing situation in which he 
wrote five January 30 calls against 500 XYZ common. The following prices exist cur­
rently, l month before expiration: 
XYZ common, 29¼; 
January 30 call,¼; and 
April 30 call, 2¼. 
The writer can only make ¼ a point more of time premium on this covered write for 
the time remaining until expiration. It is possible that his money could be put to bet­
ter use by rolling forward to the April 30 call. Commissions for rolling forward must 
be subtracted from the April 30's premium to present a true comparison. 
By remaining in the January 30, the writer could make, at most, $250 for the 30 
days remaining until January expiration. This is a return of $8.33 per day. The com­
missions for rolling forward would be approximately $100, including both the buy­
back and the new sale. Since the current time premium in the April 30 call is $250 
per option, this would mean that the writer would stand to make 5 times $250 less 
the $100 in commissions during the 120-day period until April expiration; $1,150 
divided by 120 days is $9.58 per day. Thus, the per-day return is higher from the April 
30 than from the January 30, after commissions are included. The writer should roll 
forward to the April 30 at this time. 
Rolling forward, since it involves a positive cash flow ( that is, it is a credit trans­
action) simultaneously increases the writer's maximum profit potential and lowers the 
break-even point. In the example above, the credit for rolling forward is 2 points, so 
the break-even point will be lowered by 2 points and the maximum profit potential 
is also increased by the 2-point credit. 
A simple calculator can provide one with the return-per-day calculation neces­
sary to make the decision concerning rolling forward. The preceding analysis is only 
directly applicable to rolling forward at the same striking price. Rolling-up or rolling­
down decisions at expiration, since they involve different striking prices, cannot be 
based solely on the differential returns in time premium values offered by the options 
in question. 
In the earlier discussion concerning rolling up, it was mentioned that at or near 
expiration, one may have no choice but to write the next higher striking price if he 
wants to retain his stock. This does not necessarily involve a debit transaction, how­
ever. If the stock is volatile enough, one might even be able to roll up for even money 
or a slight credit at expiration. Should this occur, it would be a desirable situation and 
should always be taken advantage of. 

===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
Cbapter 2: Covered Ca# Writing 
Example: The following prices exist at January expiration: 
XYZ, 50; 
XYZ January 45 call, 5; and 
XYZ July 50 call, 7. 
85 
In this case, if one had originally written the January 45 call, he could now roll up to 
the July 50 at expiration for a credit of 2 points. This action is quite prudent, since 
the break-even point and the maximum profit potential are enhanced. The break­
even point is lowered by the 2 points of credit received from rolling up. The maxi­
mum profit potential is increased substantially - by 7 points - since the striking price 
is raised by 5 points and an additional 2 points of credit are taken in from the roll up. 
Consequently, whenever one can roll up for a credit, a situation that would normally 
arise only on more volatile stocks, he should do so. 
Another choice that may occur at or near expiration is that of rolling down. The 
case may arise whereby one has allowed a written call to expire worthless with the 
stock more than a small distance below the striking price. The writer is then faced 
with the decision of either writing a small-premium out-of-the-money call or a larg­
er-premium in-the-money call. Again, an example may prove to be useful. 
Example: Just after the January 25 call has expired worthless, 
XYZ is at 22, 
XYZ July 25 call at ¾, and 
XYZ July 20 call at 3½. 
If the investor were now to write the July 25 call, he would be receiving only¾ of a 
point of downside protection. However, his maximum profit potential would be quite 
large if XYZ could rally to 25 by expiration. On the other hand, the July 20 at 3½ is 
an attractive write that affords substantial downside protection, and its 1 ½ points of 
time value premium are twice that offered by the July 25 call. In a purely analytic 
sense, one should not base his decision on what his performance has been to date, 
but that is a difficult axiom to apply in practice. If this investor owns XYZ at a high­
er price, he will almost surely opt for the July 25 call. If, however, he owns XYZ at 
approximately the same price, he will have no qualms about writing the July 20 call. 
There is no absolute rule that can be applied to all such situations, but one is usual­
ly better off writing the call that provides the best balance between return and down­
side protection at all times. Only if one is bullish on the underlying stock should he 
write the July 25 call. 

===== PDF PAGE 108 =====
86 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
AVOIDING THE UNCOVERED POSITION 
There is a margin rule that the covered writer must be aware of if he is considering 
taking any sort of follow-up action on the day that the written call ceases trading. If 
another call is sold on that day, even though the written call is obviously going to 
expire worthless, the writer will be considered uncovered for margin purposes over 
the weekend and will be obligated to put forth the collateral for an uncovered option. 
This is usually not what the writer intends to do; being aware of this rule will elimi­
nate unwanted margin calls. Furthermore, uncovered options may be considered 
unsuitable for many covered writers. 
Example: A customer owns XYZ and has January 20 calls outstanding on the last day 
of trading of the January series (the third Friday of January; the calls actually do not 
expire until the following day, Saturday). IfXYZ is at 15 on the last day of trading, the 
January 20 call will almost certainly expire worthless. However, should the writer 
decide to sell a longer-term call on that day without buying back the January 20, he 
will be considered uncovered over the weekend. Thus, if one plans to wait for an 
option to expire totally worthless before writing another call, he must wait until the 
Monday after expiration before writing again, assuming that he wants to remain cov­
ered. The writer should also realize that it is possible for some sort of news item to 
be announced between the end of trading in an option series and the actual expira­
tion of the series. Thus, call holders might exercise because they believe the stock will 
jump sufficiently in price to make the exercise profitable. This has happened in the 
past, two of the most notable cases being IBM in January 1975 and Carrier Corp. in 
September 1978. 
WHEN TO LET STOCK BE CALLED AWAY 
Another alternative that is open to the writer as the written call approaches expira­
tion is to let the stock be called away if it is above the striking price. In many cases, 
it is to the advantage of the writer to keep rolling options forward for credits, there­
by retaining his stock ownership. However, in certain cases, it may be advisable to 
allow the stock to be called away. It should be emphasized that the writer often has 
a definite choice in this matter, since he can generally tell when the call is about to 
be exercised - when the time value premium disappears. 
The reason that it is normally desirable to roll forward is that, over time, the 
covered writer will realize a higher return by rolling instead of being called. The 
option commissions for rolling forward every three or six months are smaller than the 
commissions for buying and selling the underlying stock every three or six months, 
and therefore the eventual return will be higher. However, if an inferior return has 

===== PDF PAGE 109 =====
Cl,opter 2: Covered Call Writing 87 
to be accepted or the break-even point will be raised significantly by rolling forward, 
one must consider the alternative of letting the stock be called away. 
Example: A covered write is established by buying XYZ at 49 and selling an April 50 
call for 3 points. The original break-even point was thus 46. Near expiration, suppose 
XYZ has risen to 56 and the April 50 is trading at 6. If the investor wants to roll for­
ward, now is the time to do so, because the call is at parity. However, he notes that 
the choices are somewhat limited. Suppose the following prices exist with XYZ at 56: 
XYZ October 50 call, 7; and XYZ October 60 call, 2. It seems apparent that the pre­
mium levels have declined since the original writing position was established, but 
that is an occurrence beyond the control of the writer, who must work in the current 
market environment. 
If the writer attempts to roll forward to the October 50, he could make at most 
1 additional point of profit until October (the time premium in the call). This repre­
sents an extremely low rate of return, and the writer should reject this alternative 
since there are surely better returns available in covered writes on other securities. 
On the other hand, if the writer tries to roll up and forward, it will cost 4 points 
to do so - 6 points to buy back the April 50 less 2 points received for the October 60. 
This debit transaction means that his break-even point would move up from the orig­
inal level of 46 to a new level of 50. If the common declines below 54, he would be 
eating into profits already at hand, since the October 60 provides only 2 points of pro­
tection from the current stock price of 56. If the writer is not confidently bullish on 
the outlook for XYZ, he should not roll up and forward. 
At this point, the writer has exhausted his alternatives for rolling. His remaining 
choice is to let the stock be called away and to use the proceeds to establish a cov­
ered write in a new stock, one that offers a more attractive rate of return with rea­
sonable downside protection. This choice of allowing the stock to be called away is 
generally the wisest strategy if both of the following criteria are met: 
1. Rolling forward offers only a minimal return. 
2. Rolling up and forward significantly raises the break-even point and leaves the 
position relatively unprotected should the stock drop in price. 
SPECIAL WRITING SITUATIONS 
Our discussions have pertained directly to writing against common stock. However, 
one may also write covered call options against convertible securities, warrants, or 
LEAPS. In addition, a different type of covered writing strategy - the incremental 

===== PDF PAGE 110 =====
88 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
return concept - is described that has great appeal to large stockholders, both indi­
viduals and institutions. 
COVERED WRITING AGAINST A CONVERTIBLE SECURITY 
It may be more advantageous to buy a security that is convertible into common stock 
than to buy the stock itself, for covered call writing purposes. Convertible bonds and 
convertible preferred stocks are securities commonly used for this purpose. One 
advantage of using the convertible security is that it often has a higher yield than does 
the common stock itself. 
Before describing the covered write, it may be beneficial to review the basics of 
convertible securities. Suppose XYZ common stock has an XYZ convertible Preferred 
A stock that is convertible into 1.5 shares of common. The number of shares of com­
mon that the convertible security converts into is an important piece of information 
that the writer must know. It can be found in a Standard & Poor's Stock Guide (or 
Bond Guide, in the case of convertible bonds). 
The writer also needs to determine how many shares of the convertible securi­
ty must be owned in order to equal 100 shares of the common stock. This is quickly 
determined by dividing 100 by the conversion ratio - 1.5 in our XYZ example. Since 
100 divided by 1.5 equals 66.666, one must own 67 shares of XYZ cv Pfd A to cover 
the sale of one XYZ option for 100 shares of common. Note that neither the market 
prices of XYZ common nor the convertible security are necessary for this computa­
tion. 
When using a convertible bond, the conversion information is usually stated in 
a form such as, "converts into 50 shares at a price of 20." The price is irrelevant. What 
is important is the number of shares that the bond converts into - 50 in this case. 
Thus, if one were using these bonds for covered writing of one call, he would need 
two (2,000) bonds to own the equivalent of 100 shares of stock. 
Once one knows how much of the convertible security must be purchased, he 
can use the actual prices of the securities, and their yields, to determine whether a 
covered write against the common or the convertible is more attractive. 
Example: The following information is known: 
XYZ common, 50; 
XYZ CV Pfd A, 80; 
XYZ July 50 call, 5; 
XYZ dividend, 1.00 per share annually; and 
XYZ cv Pfd A dividend, 5.00 per share annually. 

===== PDF PAGE 111 =====
Chapter 2: Covered CaH Writing 89 
Note that, in either case, the same call - the July 50 -would be written. The use of 
the convertible as the underlying security does not alter the choice of which option to 
use. To make the comparison of returns easier, commissions are ignored in the cal­
culations given in Table 2-25. In reality, the commissions for the stock purchase, 
either common or preferred, would be very similar. Thus, from a numerical point of 
view, it appears to be more advantageous to write against the convertible than against 
the common. 
TABLE 2-25. 
Comparison of common and convertible writes. 
Write against Common Write against Convertible 
Buy underlying security $5,000(100 XYZ) $5,360 (67 XYZ CV Pfd A) 
Sell one July 50 call 500 - 500 
Net cash investment $4,500 $4,860 
Premium collected $ 500 $ 500 
Dividends until July 50 250 
Maximum profit potential $ 550 $ 750 
Return (profit divided by 
investment) 12.2% 15.4% 
When writing against a convertible security, additional considerations should be 
looked at. The first is the premium of the convertible security. In the example, with 
XYZ selling at 50, the XYZ cv Pfd A has a true value of 1.5 times 50, or $75 per share. 
However, it is selling at 80, which represents a premium of 5 points above its com­
puted value of 75. Normally, one would not want to buy a convertible security if the 
premium is too large. In this example, the premium appears quite reasonable. Any 
convertible premium greater than 15% above computed value might be considered 
to be too large. 
Another consideration when writing against convertible securities is the han­
dling of assignment. If the writer is assigned, he may either (1) convert his preferred 
stock into common and deliver that, or (2) sell the preferred in the market and use 
the proceeds to buy 100 shares of common stock in the market for delivery against 
the assignment notice. The second choice is usually preferable if the convertible 
security has any premium at all, since converting the preferred into common causes 
the loss of any premium in the convertible, as well as the loss of accrued interest in 
the case of a convertible bond. 

===== PDF PAGE 112 =====
90 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
The writer should also be aware of whether or not the convertible is catlable 
and, if so, what the exact terms are. Once the convertible has been called by the com­
pany, it will no longer trade in relation to the underlying stock, but will instead trade 
at the call price. Thus, if the stock should climb sharply, the writer could be incur­
ring losses on his written option without any corresponding benefit from his con­
vertible security. Consequently, if the convertible is called, the entire position should 
normally be closed immediately by selling the convertible and buying the option 
back. 
Other aspects of covered writing, such as rolling down or forward, do not 
change even if the option is written against a convertible security. One would take 
action based on the relationship of the option price and the common stock price, as 
usual. 
WRITING AGAINST WARRANTS 
It is also possible to write covered call options against warrants. Again, one must own 
enough warrants to convert into 100 shares of the underlying stock; generally, this 
would be 100 warrants. The transaction must be a cash transaction, the warrants 
must be paid for in full, and they have no loan value. Technically, listed warrants may 
be marginable, but many brokerage houses still require payment in full. There may 
be an additional investment requirement. Warrants also have an exercise price. If the 
exercise price of the warrant is higher than the striking price of the call, the covered 
writer must also deposit the difference between the two as part of his investment. 
The advantage of using warrants is that, if they are deeply in-the-money, they 
may provide the cash covered writer with a higher return, since less of an investment 
is involved. 
Example: XYZ is at 50 and there are XYZ warrants to buy the common at 25. Since 
the warrant is so deeply in-the-money, it will be selling for approximately $25 per 
warrant. XYZ pays no dividend. Thus, if the writer were considering a covered write 
of the XYZ July 50, he might choose to use the warrant instead of the common, since 
his investment, per 100 shares of common, would only be $2,500 instead of the 
$5,000 required to buy 100 XYZ. The potential profit would be the same in either 
case because no dividend is involved. 
Even if the stock does pay a dividend (warrants themselves have no dividend), 
the writer may still be able to earn a higher return by writing against the warrant than 
against the common because of the smaller investment involved. This would depend, 
of course, on the exact size of the dividend and on how deeply the warrant is in-the­
money. 

===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
Cbapter 2: Covered Call Writing 91 
Covered writing against warrants is not a frequent practice because of the small 
number of warrants on optionable stocks and the problems inherent in checking 
available returns. However, in certain circumstances, the writer may actually gain a 
decided advantage by writing against a deep in-the-money warrant. It is often not 
advisable to write against a warrant that is at- or out-of-the-money, since it can 
decline by a large percentage if the underlying stock drops in price, producing a high­
risk position. Also, the writer's investment may increase in this case if he rolls down 
to an option with a striking price lower than the warrant's exercise price. 
WRITING AGAINST LEAPS 
A form of covered call writing can be constructed by buying LEAPS call options and 
selling shorter-term out-of-the-money calls against them. This strategy is much like 
writing calls against warrants. This strategy is discussed in more detail in Chapter 25 
on LEAPS, under the subject of diagonal spreads. 
PERCS 
The PERCS (Preferred Equity Redemption Cumulative Stock) is a form of covered 
writing. It is discussed in Chapter 32. 
THE INCREMENTAL RETURN CONCEPT OF COVERED WRITING 
The incremental return concept of covered call writing is a way in which the covered 
writer can earn the full value of stock appreciation between todays stock price and a 
target sale price, which may be substantially higher. At the same time, the writer can 
earn an incremental, positive return from writing options. 
Many institutional investors are somewhat apprehensive about covered call 
writing because of the upside limit that is placed on profit potential. If a call is writ­
ten against a stock that subsequently declines in price, most institutional managers 
would not view this as an unfavorable situation, since they would be outperforming 
all managers who owned the stock and who did not write a call. However, if the stock 
rises substantially after the call is written, many institutional managers do not like 
having their profits limited by the written call. This strategy is not only for institu­
tional money managers, although one should have a relatively substantial holding in 
an underlying stock to attempt the strategy - at least 500 shares and preferably 1,000 
shares or more. The incremental return concept can be used by anyone who is plan­
ning to hold his stock, even if it should temporarily decline in price, until it reaches a 
predetermined, higher price at which he is willing to sell the stock. 

===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
92 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
The basic strategy involves, as an initial step, selecting the target price at which 
the writer is willing to sell his stock. 
Example: A customer owns 1,000 shares of XYZ, which is currently at 60, and is will­
ing to sell the stock at 80. In the meantime, he would like to realize a positive cash 
flow from writing options against his stock. This positive cash flow does not neces­
sarily result in a realized option gain until the stock is called away. Most likely, with 
the stock at 60, there would not be options available with a striking price of 80, so one 
could not write 10 July 80's, for example. This would not be an optimum strategy 
even if the July 80's existed, for the investor would be receiving so little in option pre­
miums - perhaps 10 cents per call - that writing might not be worthwhile. The incre­
mental return strategy allows this investor to achieve his objectives regardless of the 
existence of options with a higher striking price. 
The foundation of the incremental return strategy is to write against only a part 
of the entire stock holding initially, and to write these calls at the striking price near­
est the current stock price. Then, should the stock move up to the next higher strik­
ing price, one rolls up for a credit by adding to the number of calls written. Rolling 
for a credit is mandatory and is the key to the strategy. Eventually, the stock reaches 
the target price and the stock is called away, the investor sells all his stock at the tar­
get price, and in addition earns the total credits from all the option transactions. 
Example: XYZ is 60, the investor owns 1,000 shares, and his target price is 80. One 
might begin by selling three of the longest-term calls at 60 for 7 points apiece. Table 
2-26 shows how a poor case - one in which the stock climbs directly to the target 
price - might work. As Table 2-26 shows, if XYZ rose to 70 in one month, the three 
original calls would be bought back and enough calls at 70 would be sold to produce 
a credit - 5 XYZ October 70's. If the stock continued upward to 80 in another month, 
the 5 calls would be bought back and the entire position - 10 calls - would be writ­
ten against the target price. 
If XYZ remains above 80, the stock will be called away and all 1,000 shares will 
be sold at the target price of 80. In addition, the investor will earn all the option cred­
its generated along the way. These amount to $2,800. Thus, the writer obtained the 
full appreciation of his stock to the target price plus an incremental, positive return 
from option writing. 
In a flat market, the strategy is relatively easy to monitor. If a written call loses 
its time value premium and therefore might be subject to assignment, the writer can 
roll forward to a more distant expiration series, keeping the quantity of written calls 
constant. This transaction would generate additional credits as well. 

===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
C1,,,pter 2: Covered Call Writing 
TABLE 2-26. 
Two months of incremental return strategy. 
Day 1 : XYZ = 60 
Sell 3 XYZ October 60's at 7 
One month later: XYZ = 70 
Buy back the 3 XYZ Oct 60's at 11 and 
sell 5 XYZ Oct 70's at 7 
Two months later: XYZ = 80 
Buy back the 5 Oct 70's at 11 and 
sell 10 XYZ Oct 80's at 6 
COVERED CALL WRITING SUMMARY 
93 
+$2, 100 credit 
-$3,300 debit 
+$3,500 credit 
-$5 ,500 debit 
+$6.000 credit 
+$2,800 credit 
This concludes the chapter on covered call writing. The strategy will be referred to 
later, when compared with other strategies. Here is a brief summary of the more 
important points that were discussed. 
Covered call writing is a viable strategy because it reduces the risk of stock own­
ership and will make one's portfolio less volatile to short-term market movements. It 
should be understood, however, that covered call writing may underperform stock 
ownership in general because of the fact that stocks can rise great distances, while a 
covered write has limited upside profit potential. The choice of which call to write 
can make for a more aggressive or more conservative write. Writing in-the-money 
calls is strategically more conservative than writing out-of-the-money calls, because 
of the larger amount of downside protection received. The total return concept of 
covered call writing attempts to achieve the maximum balance between income from 
all sources - option premiums, stock ownership, and dividend income - and down­
side protection. This balance is usually realized by writing calls when the stock is near 
the striking price, either slightly in- or slightly out-of-the-money. 
The writer should compute various returns before entering into the position: 
the return if exercised, the return if the stock is unchanged at expiration, and the 
break-even point. To truly compare various writes, returns should be annualized, and 
all commissions and dividends should be included in the calculations. Returns will be 
increased by taking larger positions in the underlying stock - 500 or 1,000 shares. 
Also, by utilizing a brokerage firm's capability to produce "net" executions, buying the 
stock and selling the call at a specified net price differential, one will receive better 
executions and realize higher returns in the long run. 

===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
92 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
The basic strategy involves, as an initial step, selecting the target price at which 
the writer is willing to sell his stock 
Example: A customer owns 1,000 shares ofXYZ, which is currently at 60, and is will­
ing to sell the stock at 80. In the meantime, he would like to realize a positive cash 
flow from writing options against his stock This positive cash flow does not neces­
sarily result in a realized option gain until the stock is called away. Most likely, with 
the stock at 60, there would not be options available with a striking price of 80, so one 
could not write 10 July 80's, for example. This would not be an optimum strategy 
even if the July 80's existed, for the investor would be receiving so little in option pre­
miums - perhaps 10 cents per call - that writing might not be worthwhile. The incre­
mental return strategy allows this investor to achieve his objectives regardless of the 
existence of options with a higher striking price. 
The foundation of the incremental return strategy is to write against only a part 
of the entire stock holding initially, and to write these calls at the striking price near­
est the current stock price. Then, should the stock move up to the next higher strik­
ing price, one rolls up for a credit by adding to the number of calls written. Rolling 
for a credit is mandatory and is the key to the strategy. Eventually, the stock reaches 
the target price and the stock is called away, the investor sells all his stock at the tar­
get price, and in addition earns the total credits from all the option transactions. 
Example: XYZ is 60, the investor owns 1,000 shares, and his target price is 80. One 
might begin by selling three of the longest-term calls at 60 for 7 points apiece. Table 
2-26 shows how a poor case - one in which the stock climbs directly to the target 
price - might work. As Table 2-26 shows, if XYZ rose to 70 in one month, the three 
original calls would be bought back and enough calls at 70 would be sold to produce 
a credit - 5 XYZ October 70's. If the stock continued upward to 80 in another month, 
the 5 calls would be bought back and the entire position - 10 calls - would be writ­
ten against the target price. 
IfXYZ remains above 80, the stock will be called away and all 1,000 shares will 
be sold at the target price of 80. In addition, the investor will earn all the option cred­
its generated along the way. These amount to $2,800. Thus, the writer obtained the 
full appreciation of his stock to the target price plus an incremental, positive return 
from option writing. 
In a flat market, the strategy is relatively easy to monitor. If a written call loses 
its time value premium and therefore might be subject to assignment, the writer can 
roll f01ward to a more distant expiration series, keeping the quantity of written calls 
constant. This transaction would generate additional credits as well. 

===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
O.,,er 2: Covered Call Writing 
TABLE 2-26. 
Two months of incremental return strategy. 
Doy 1 : XYZ = 60 
Sell 3 XYZ October 60's at 7 
One month later: XYZ = 70 
Buy back the 3 XYZ Oct 60's at 11 and 
sell 5 XYZ Oct 70's at 7 
Twa months later: XYZ = 80 
Buy back the 5 Oct 70's at 11 and 
sell 10 XYZ Oct 80's at 6 
COVERED CALL WRITING SUMMARY 
93 
+$2, 100 credit 
-$3 ,300 debit 
+$3,500 credit 
-$5 ,500 debit 
+$6,000 credit 
+$2,800 credit 
This concludes the chapter on covered call writing. The strategy will be referred to 
later, when compared with other strategies. Here is a brief summary of the more 
important points that were discussed. 
Covered call writing is a viable strategy because it reduces the risk of stock own­
ership and will make one's portfolio less volatile to short-term market movements. It 
should be understood, however, that covered call writing may underperform stock 
ownership in general because of the fact that stocks can rise great distances, while a 
covered write has limited upside profit potential. The choice of which call to write 
can make for a more aggressive or more conservative write. Writing in-the-money 
calls is strategically more conservative than writing out-of-the-money calls, because 
of the larger amount of downside protection received. The total return concept of 
covered call writing attempts to achieve the maximum balance between income from 
all sources - option premiums, stock ownership, and dividend income - and down­
side protection. This balance is usually realized by writing calls when the stock is near 
the striking price, either slightly in- or slightly out-of-the-money. 
The writer should compute various returns before entering into the position: 
the return if exercised, the return if the stock is unchanged at expiration, and the 
break-even point. To truly compare various writes, returns should be annualized, and 
all commissions and dividends should be included in the calculations. Returns will be 
increased by taking larger positions in the underlying stock - 500 or 1,000 shares. 
Also, by utilizing a brokerage firm's capability to produce "net" executions, buying the 
stock and selling the call at a specified net price differential, one will receive better 
executions and realize higher returns in the long run. 

===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
94 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
The selection of which call to write should be made on a comparison of avail­
able returns and downside protection. One can sometimes write part of his position 
out-of-the-money and the other part in-the-money to force a balance between return 
and protection that might not otherwise exist. Finally, one should not write against an 
underlying stock if he is bearish on the stock. The writer should be slightly bullish, or 
at least neutral, on the underlying stock. 
Follow-up action can be as important as the selection of the initial position 
itself. By rolling down if the underlying stock drops, the investor can add downside 
protection and current income. If one is unwilling to limit his upside potential too 
severely, he may consider rolling down only part of his call writing position. As the 
written call expires, the writer should roll forward into a more distant expiration 
month if the stock is relatively close to the original striking price. Higher consistent 
returns are achieved in this manner, because one is not spending additional stock 
commissions by letting the stock be called away. An aggressive follow-up action can 
also be taken when the underlying stock rises in price: The writer can roll up to a 
higher striking price. This action increases the maximum profit potential but also 
exposes the position to loss if the stock should subsequently decline. One would want 
to take no follow-up action and let his stock be called if it is above the striking price 
and if there are better returns available elsewhere in other securities. 
Covered call writing can also be done against convertible securities - bonds or 
preferred stocks. These convertibles sometimes offer higher dividend yields and 
therefore increase the overall return from covered writing. Also, the use of warrants 
or LEAPS in place of the underlying stock may be advantageous in certain circum­
stances, because the net investment is lowered while the profit potential remains the 
same. Therefore, the overall return could be higher. 
Finally, the larger individual stockholder or institutional investor who wants to 
achieve a certain price for his stock holdings should operate his covered writing strat­
egy under the incremental return concept. This will allow him to realize the full prof­
it potential of his underlying stock, up to the target sale price, and to earn additional 
positive income from option writing. 

===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
Call Buying 
The success of a call buying strategy depends primarily on one's ability to select 
stocks that will go up and to time the selection reasonably well. Thus, call buying is 
not a strategy in the same sense of the word as most of the other strategies discussed 
in this text. Most other strategies are designed to remove some of the exactness of 
stock picking, allowing one to be neutral or at least to have some room for error and 
still make a profit. Techniques of call buying are important, though, because it is nec­
essary to understand the long side of calls in order to understand more complex 
strategies correctly. 
Call buying is the simplest form of option investment, and therefore is the most 
frequently used option "strategy" by the public investor. The following section out­
lines the basic facts that one needs to know to implement an intelligent call buying 
program. 
WHY BUY? 
The main attraction in buying calls is that they provide the speculator with a great 
deal of leverage. One could potentially realize large percentage profits from only a 
modest rise in price by the underlying stock. Moreover, even though they may be 
large percentagewise, the risks cannot exceed a fixed dollar amount - the price orig­
inally paid for the call. Calls must be paid for in full; they have no margin value and 
do not constitute equity for margin purposes. Note: The preceding statements 
regarding payment for an option in full do not necessarily apply to LEAPS options, 
which were declared marginable in 1999. The following simple example illustrates 
how a call purchase might work. 
95 

===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
96 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Example: Assume that XYZ is at 48 and the 6-month call, the July 50, is selling for 
3. Thus, with an investment of $300, the call buyer may participate, for 6 months, in 
a move upward in the price ofXYZ common. IfXYZ should rise in price by 10 points 
(just over 20%), the July 50 call will be worth at least $800 and the call buyer would 
have a 167% profit on a move in the stock of just over 20%. This is the leverage that 
attracts speculators to call buying. At expiration, if XYZ is below 50, the buyer's loss 
is total, but is limited to his initial $300 investment, even if XYZ declines in price sub­
stantially. Although this risk is equal to 100% of his initial investment, it is still small 
dollarwise. One should nornwlly not invest more than 15% of his risk capital in call 
buying, because of the relatively large percentage risks involved. 
Some investors participate in call buying on a limited basis to add some upside 
potential to their portfolios while keeping the risk to a fixed amount. For example, if 
an investor normally only purchased low-volatility, conservative stocks because he 
wanted to limit his downside risk, he might consider putting a small percentage of his 
cash into calls on more volatile stocks. In this manner, he could "trade" higher-risk 
stocks than he might normally do. If these volatile stocks increase in price, the 
investor will profit handsomely. However, if they decline substantially - as well they 
might, being volatile - the investor has limited his dollar risk by owning the calls 
rather than the stock. 
Another reason some investors buy calls is to be able to buy stock at a reason­
able price without missing a market. 
Example: With XYZ at 75, this investor might buy a call on XYZ at 80. He would like 
to own XYZ at 80 if it can prove itself capable of rallying and be in-the-money at expi­
ration. He would exercise the call in that case. On the other hand, if XYZ declines in 
price instead, he has not tied up money in the stock and can lose only an amount 
equal to the call premium that he paid, an amount that is generally much less than 
the price of the stock itself. 
Another approach to call buying is sometimes utilized, also by an investor who 
does not want to "miss the market." Suppose an investor knows that, in the near 
future, he will have an amount of money large enough to purchase a particular stock; 
perhaps he is closing the sale of his house or a certificate of deposit is maturing. 
However, he would like to buy the stock now, for he feels a rally is imminent. He 
might buy calls at the present time if he had a small amount of cash available. The 
call purchases would require an investment much smaller than the stock purchase. 
Then, when he receives the cash that he knew was forthcoming, he could exercise the 
calls and buy the stock. In this way, he might have participated in a rally by the stock 
before he actually had the money available to pay for the stock in full. 

===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
Cl,opter 3: Call Buying 97 
RISK AND REWARD FOR THE CALL BUYER 
The most important fact for the call buyer to realize is that he will normally win only 
if the stock rises in price. All the worthwhile analysis in the world spent in selecting 
which call to buy will not produce profits if the underlying stock declines. However, 
this fact should not dissuade one from making reasonable analyses in his call buying 
selections. Too often, the call buyer feels that a stock will move up, and is correct in 
that part of his projection, but still loses money on his call purchase because he failed 
to analyze the risk and rewards involved with the various calls available for purchase 
at the time. He bought the wrong call on the right stock. 
Since the best ally that the call buyer has is upward movement in the underly­
ing stock, the selection of the underlying stock is the most important choice the call 
buyer has to make. Since timing is so important when buying calls, the technical fac­
tors of stock selection probably outweigh the fundamentals; even if positive funda­
mentals do exist, one does not know how long it will take in order for them to be 
reflected in the price of the stock. One must be bullish on the underlying stock in 
order to consider buying calls on that stock. Once the stock selection has been made, 
only then can the call buyer begin to consider other factors, such as which striking 
price to use and which expiration to buy. The call buyer may have another ally, but 
not one that he can normally predict: If the stock on which he owns a call becomes 
more volatile, the call's price will rise to reflect that change. 
The purchase of an out-of-the-money call generally offers both larger potential 
risk and larger potential reward than does the purchase of an in-the-money call. 
Many call buyers tend to select the out-of-the-money call merely because it is cheap­
er in price. Absolute dollar price should in no way be a deciding factor for the call 
buyer. If one's funds are so limited that he can only afford to buy the cheapest calls, 
he should not be speculating in this strategy. If the underlying stock increases in price 
substantially, the out-of-the-money call will naturally provide the largest rewards. 
However, if the stock advances only moderately in price, the in-the-money call may 
actually perform better. 
Example: XYZ is at 65 and the July 60 sells for 7 while the July 70 sells for 3. If the 
stock moves up to 68 relatively slowly, the buyer of the July 70 - the out-of-the­
money call - may actually experience a loss, even if the call has not yet expired. 
However, the holder of the in-the-money July 60 will definitely have a profit because 
the call will sell for at least 8 points, its intrinsic value. The point is that, percentage­
wise, an in-the-rrwney call will offer better rewards for a rrwdest stock gain, and an 
out-ofthe-rrwney call is better for larger stock gains. 

===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
98 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
When risk is considered, the in-the-money call clearly has less probability of 
risk. In the prior example, the in-the-money call buyer would not lose his entire 
investment unless XYZ fell by at least 5 points. However, the buyer of the out-of-the­
money July 70 would lose all of his investment unless the stock advanced by more 
than 5 points by expiration. Obviously, the probability that the in-the-money call will 
expire worthless is much smaller than that for the out-of-the-money call. 
The time remaining to expiration is also relevant to the call buyer. If the stock 
is fairly close to the striking price, the near-term call will most closely follow the price 
movement of the underlying stock, so it has the greatest rewards and also the great­
est risks. The far-term call, because it has a large amount of time remaining, offers 
the least risk and least percentage reward. The intermediate-temi call offers a mod­
erate amount of each, and is therefore often the most attractive one to buy. Many 
times an investor will buy the longer-term call because it only costs a point or a point 
and a half more than the intermediate-term call. He feels that the extra price is a bar­
gain to pay for three extra months of time. This line of thought may prove somewhat 
misleading, however, because most call buyers don't hold calls for more than 60 or 90 
days. Thus, even though it looks attractive to pay the extra point for the long-term 
call, it may prove to be an unnecessary expense if, as is usually the case, one will be 
selling the call in two or three months. 
CERTAINTY OF TIMING 
The certainty with which one expects the underlying stock to advance may also help 
to play a part in his selection of which call to buy. If one is fairly sure that the under­
lying stock is about to rise immediately, he should strive for more reward and not be 
as concerned about risk. This would mean buying short-term, slightly out-of-the­
money calls. Of course, this is only a general rule; one would not normally buy an out­
of-the-money call that has only one week remaining until expiration, in any case. At 
the opposite end of the spectrum, if one is very uncertain about his timing, he should 
buy the longest-term call, to moderate his risk in case his timing is wrong by a wide 
margin. This situation could easily result, for example, if one feels that a positive fun­
damental aspect concerning the company will assert itself and cause the stock to 
increase in price at an unknown time in the future. Since the buyer does not know 
whether this positive fundamental will come to light in the next month or six months 
from now, he should buy the longer-term call to allow room for error in timing. 
In many cases, one is not intending to hold the purchased call for any signifi­
cant period of time; he is just looking to capitalize on a quick, short-term movement 
by the underlying stock. In this case, he would want to buy a relatively short-term in­
the-money call. Although such a call may be more ex-pensive than an out-of-the-
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 3 | PDF PAGES 123-145 =====

===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
Cl,apter 3: Call Buying 99 
money call on the same underlying stock, it will most surely move up on any increase 
in price by the underlying stock. Thus, the short-term trader would profit. 
THE DELTA 
The reader should by now be familiar with basic facts concerning call options: The 
time premium is highest when the stock is at the striking price of the call; it is lowest 
deep in- or out-of-the-money; option prices do not decay at a linear rate -the time pre­
mium disappears more rapidly as the option approaches expiration. As a further means 
of review, the option pricing curve introduced in Chapter 1 is reprinted here. Notice 
that all the facts listed above can be observed from Figure 3-1. The curves are much 
nearer the "intrinsic value" line at the ends than they are in the middle, implying that 
the time value premium is greatest when the stock is at the strike, and is least when 
the stock moves away from the strike either into- or out-of-the-money. Furthermore, 
the fact that the curve for the 3-month option lies only about halfway between the 
intrinsic value line and the curve of the 9-month option implies that the rate of decay 
of an at- or near-the-money option is not linear. The reader may also want to refer back 
to the graph of time value premium decay in Chapter 1 (Figure 1-4). 
There is another property of call options that the buyer should be familiar with, 
the delta of the option (also called the hedge ratio). Simply stated, the delta of an 
option is the arrwunt by which the call will increase or decrease in price if the under­
lying stock moves by 1 point. 
FIGURE 3-1. 
Option pricing curve; 3-, 6-, and 9-month calls. 
Q) 
0 
~ 
C: 
0 
a 
0 
9-Month Curve 
6-Month Curve 
3-Month Curve 
/ 
Intrinsic Value 
Striking Price 
Stock Price 
As expiration date draws 
closer, the lower curve 
merges with the intrinsic 
value line. The option 
price then equals its 
intrinsic value. 

===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
100 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Example: The delta of a call option is close to 1 when the underlying stock is well 
above the striking price of the call. If XYZ were 60 and the XYZ July 50 call were 
101/s, the call would change in price by nearly 1 point ifXYZ moved by 1 point, either 
up or down. A deeply out-of-the-money call has a delta of nearly zero. If XYZ were 
40, the July 50 call might be selling at¼ of a point. The call would change very little 
in price if XYZ moved by one point, to either 41 or 39. When the stock is at the strik­
ing price, the delta is usually between one-half of a point and five-eighths of a point. 
Very long-term calls may have even larger at-the-money deltas. Thus, if XYZ were 50 
and the XYZ July 50 call were 5, the call might increase to 5½ if XYZ rose to 51 or 
decrease to 4½ if XYZ dropped to 49. 
Actually, the delta changes each time the underlying stock changes even frac­
tionally in price; it is an exact mathematical derivation that is presented in a later 
chapter. This is most easily seen by the fact that a deep in-the-money option has a 
delta of 1. However, if the stock should undergo a series of I-point drops down to the 
striking price, the delta will be more like½, certainly not 1 any longer. In reality, the 
delta changed instantaneously all during the price decline by the stock. For those 
who are geometrically inclined, the preceding option price curve is useful in deter­
mining a graphic representation of the delta. The delta is the slope of the tangent line 
to the price curve. Notice that a deeply in-the-money option lies to the upper right 
side of the curve, very nearly on the intrinsic value line, which has a slope of 1 above 
the strike. Similarly, a deeply out-of-the-money call lies to the left on the price curve, 
again near the intrinsic value line, which has a slope of zero below the strike. 
Since it is more common to relate the option's price change to a full point 
change in the underlying stock (rather than to deal in "instantaneous" price changes), 
the concepts of up delta and down delta arise. That is, if the underlying stock moves 
up by 1 full point, a call with a delta of .50 might increase by 5/s. However, should the 
stock fall by one full point, the call might decrease by only 3/s. There is a different net 
price change in the call when the stock moves up by 1 full point as opposed to when 
it falls by a point. The up delta is observed to be 5/s while the down delta is 3/s. In the 
true mathematical sense, there is only one delta and it measures "instantaneous" 
price change. The concepts of up delta and down delta are practical, rather than the­
oretical, concepts that merely illustrate the fact that the true delta changes whenev­
er the stock price changes, even by as little as 1 point. In the following examples and 
in later chapters, only one delta is referred to. 
The delta is an important piece of information for the call buyer because it can 
tell him how much of an increase or decrease he can expect for short-term moves by 
the underlying stock. This piece of information may help the buyer decide which call 
to buy. 

===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
Chapter 3: Call Buying 101 
Example: If XYZ is 4 7½ and the call buyer expects a quick, but possibly limited, rise 
in price in the underlying stock, should he buy the 45 call or the 50 call? The delta 
may help him decide. He has the following information: 
XYZ: 47 1/2 XYZ July 45 call: price = 31/2, 
XYZ July 50 call: price = 1, 
delta = 5/a 
delta = 1/4 
It will make matters easier to make a slightly incorrect, but simplifying, assumption 
that the deltas remain constant over the short term. Which call is the better buy if 
the buyer expects the stock to quickly rise to 49? This would represent a 1 ½-point 
increase in XYZ, which would translate into a 15/16 increase in the July 45 (l½ times 
5/s) or a 3/s increase in the July 50 (1 ½ times ¼). Consequently, the July 45, if it 
increased in price by 15/16, would appreciate by 27%. The July 50, if it increased by 
3/a, would appreciate by over 37%. Thus, the July 50 appears to be the better buy in 
this simple example. Commissions should, of course, be included when making an 
analysis for actual investment. 
The investor does not have to bother with computing deltas for himself. Any 
good call-buying data service will supply the information, and some brokerage hous­
es provide this information free of charge. 
More advanced applications of deltas are described in many of the succeeding 
chapters, as they apply to a variety of strategies. 
WHICH OPTION TO BUY? 
There are various trading strategies, some short-term, some long-term (even buy and 
hold). If one decides to use an option to implement a trading strategy, the time hori­
zon of the strategy itself often dictates the general category of option that should be 
bought - in-the-money versus out-of-the-money, near-term versus long-term, etc. 
This statement is true whether one is referring to stock, index, or futures options. 
The general rule is this: The shorter-term the strategy, the higher the delta should be 
of the instrument being used to trade the strategy. 
DAY TRADING 
For example, day trading has become a popular endeavor. Statistics have been pro­
duced that indicate that most day traders lose money. In fact, there are profitable day 
traders; it simply requires more and harder work than many are willing to invest. 
Many day traders have attempted to use options in their strategies. These day traders 

===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
102 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
apparently are attracted by the leverage available from options, but they often lose 
money via option trading as well. 
What many of these option-oriented day traders fail to realize is that, for day­
trading purposes, the instrument with the highest possible delta should be used. That 
instrument is the underlying, for it has a delta of 1.0. Day trading is hard enough 
without complicating it by trying to use options. So of you're day trading Microsoft 
(MSFT), trade the stock, not an option. 
What makes options difficult in such a short-term situation is their relatively 
wide bid-asked spread, as compared to that of the underlying instrument itself. Also, 
a day trader is looking to capture only a small part of the underlying's daily move; an 
at-the-money or out-of-the-money option just won't respond well enough to those 
movements. That is, if the delta is too low, there just isn't enough room for the option 
day trader to make money. 
If a day trader insists on using options, a short-term, in-the-money should be 
bought, for it has the largest delta available - preferably something approaching .90 
or higher. This option will respond quickly to small movements by the underlying. 
SHORT-TERM TRADING 
Suppose one employs a strategy whereby he expects to hold the underlying for 
approximately a week or two. In this case, just as with day trading, a high delta is 
desirable. However, now that the holding period is more than a day, it may be appro­
priate to buy an option as opposed to merely trading the underlying, because the 
option lessens the risk of a surprisingly large downside move. Still, it is the short­
term, in-the-money option that should be bought, for it has the largest delta, and will 
thus respond most closely to the movement in the underlying stock. Such an option 
has a very high delta, usually in excess of .80. Part of the reason that the high-delta 
options make sense in such situations is that one is fairly certain of the timing of day 
trading or very short-term trading systems. When the system being used for selection 
of which stock to trade has a high degree of timing accuracy, then the high-delta 
option is called for. 
INTERMEDIATE-TERM TRADING 
As the time horizon of one's trading strategy lengthens, it is appropriate to use an 
option with a lesser delta. This generally means that the timing of the selection 
process is less exact. One might be using a trading system based, for ernmple, on sen­
timent, which is generally not an exact timing indicator, but rather one that indicates 
a general trend change at major turning points. The timing of the forthcoming move 

===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
Gapter 3: Call Buying 103 
is not exact, because it often takes time for an extreme change in sentiment to reflect 
itself in a change of direction by the underlying. 
Hence, for a strategy such as this, one would want to use an option with a small­
er delta. The investor would limit his risk by using such an option, knowing that large 
moves are possible since the position is going to be held for several weeks or perhaps 
even a couple of months or more. Therefore, an at-the-money option can be used in 
such situations. 
I.ONG-TERM TRADING 
If one's strategy is even longer-term, an option with a lower delta can be considered. 
Such strategies would generally have only vague timing qualities, such as selecting a 
stock to buy based on the general fundamental outlook for the company. In the 
extreme, it would even apply to "buy and hold" strategies. 
Generally, buying out-of-the-money options is not recommended; but for very 
long-term strategies, one might consider something slightly out-of-the-money, or at 
least a fairly long-term at-the-money option. In either case, that option will have a 
lower delta as compared to the options that have been recommended for the other 
strategies mentioned above. Alternatively, LEAPS options might be appropriate for 
stock strategies of this type. 
ADVANCED SELECTION CRITERIA 
The criteria presented previously represented elementary techniques for selecting 
which call to buy. In actual practice, one is not usually bullish on just one stock at a 
time. In fact, the investor would like to have a list of the "best" calls to buy at any 
given time. Then, using some method of stock selection, either technical or funda­
mental, he can select three or four calls that appear to offer the best rewards. This 
list should be ranked in order of the best potential rewards available, but the con­
struction of the list itself is important. 
Call option rankings for buying purposes must be based on the volatilities of the 
underlying stocks. This is not easy to do mathematically, and as a result many pub­
lished rankings of calls are based strictly on percentage change in the underlying 
stock. Such a list is quite misleading and can lead one to the wrong conclusions. 
Example: There are two stocks with listed calls: NVS, which is not volatile, and VVS, 
which is quite volatile. Since a call on the volatile stock will be higher-priced than a 
call on the nonvolatile stock, the following prices might exist: 

===== PDF PAGE 128 =====
104 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
NVS: 40 VVS: 40 
NVS July 40 call: 2 VVS July 40 call: 4 
If these two calls are ranked for buying purposes, based strictly on a percentage 
change in the underlying stock, the NVS call will appear to be the better buy. For 
example, one might see a list such as "best call buys if the underlying stock advances 
by 10%." In this example, if each stock advanced 10% by expiration, both NVS and 
WS would be at 44. Thus, the NVS July 40 would be worth 4, having doubled in 
price, for a 100% potential profit. Meanwhile, the WS July 40 would be worth 4 also, 
for a 0% profit to the call buyer. This analysis would lead one to believe that the NVS 
July 40 is the better buy. Such a conclusion may be wrong, because an incorrect 
assumption was made in the ranking of the potentials of the two stocks. It is not right 
to assume that both stocks have the same probability of moving 10% by expiration. 
Certainly, the volatile stock has a much better chance of advancing by 10% ( or more) 
than the nonvolatile stock does. Any ranking based on equal percentage changes in 
the underlying stock, without regard for their volatilities, is useless and should be 
avoided. 
The correct method of comparing these two July 40 calls is to utilize the actual 
volatilities of the underlying stocks. Suppose that it is known that the volatile stock, 
WS, could expect to move 15% in the time to July expiration. The nonvolatile stock, 
NVS, however, could only expect a move of 5% in the same period. Using this infor­
mation, the call buyer can arrive at the conclusion that WS July 40 is the better call 
to buy: 
Stock Price in July 
VVS: 46 (up 15%) 
NVS: 42 (up 5%) 
Coll Price 
VVS July 40: 6 (up 50%) 
NVS July 40: 2 (unchanged) 
By assuming that each stock can rise in accordance with its volatility, we can see that 
the WS July 40 has the better reward potential, despite the fact that it was twice as 
expensive to begin with. This method of analysis is much more realistic. 
One more refinement needs to be made in this ranking process. Since most call 
purchases are made for holding periods of from 30 to 90 days, it is not correct to 
assume that the calls will be held to expiration. That is, even if one buys a 6-month 
call, he will normally liquidate it, to take profits or cut losses, in 1 to 3 months. The 
call buyer's list should thus be based on how the call will peiform if held for a realis­
tic time period, such as 90 days. 

===== PDF PAGE 129 =====
Chapter 3: Call Buying 105 
Suppose the volatile stock in our example, WS, has the potential to rise by 12% 
in 90 days, while the less volatile stock, NVS, has the potential of rising only 4% in 90 
days. In 90 days, the July 40 calls will not be at parity, because there will be some time 
remaining until July expiration. Thus, it is necessary to attempt to predict what their 
prices will be at the end of the 90-day holding period. Assume that the following 
prices are accurate estimates of what the July 40 calls will be selling for in 90 days, if 
the underlying stocks advance in relation to their volatilities: 
Stock Price in 90 Days 
VVS: 44.8 (up 12%) 
NVS: 41 .6 (up 4%) 
Coll Price 
VVS July 40: 6 (up 50%) 
NVS July 40: 21/2 (up 25%) 
With some time remaining in the calls, they would both have time value premium at 
the end of 90 days. The bigger time premium would be in the WS call, since the 
underlying stock is more volatile. Under this method of analysis, the WS call is still 
the better one to buy. 
The correct method of ranking potential reward situations for call buyers is as 
follows: 
1. Assume each underlying stock can advance in accordance with its volatility over 
a fixed period (30, 60, or 90 days). 
2. Estimate the call prices after the advance. 
3. Rank all potential call purchases by highest percentage reward opportunity for 
aggressive purchases. 
4. Assume each stock can decline in accordance with its volatility. 
5. Estimate the call prices after the decline. 
6. Rank all purchases by reward/risk ratio ( the percentage gain from item 2 divided 
by the percentage loss from item 5). 
The list from item 3 will generate more aggressive purchases because it incorporates 
potential rewards only. The list from item 6 would be a less speculative one. This 
method of analysis automatically incorporates the criteria set forth earlier, such as 
buying short-term out-of-the-money calls for aggressive purchases and buying 
longer-term in-the-money calls for a more conservative purchase. The delta is also a 
function of the volatility and is essentially incorporated by steps 1 and 4. 
It is virtually impossible to perform this sort of analysis without a computer. The 
call buyer can generally obtain such a list from a brokerage firm or from a data serv­
ice. For those individuals who have access to a computer and would like to generate 

===== PDF PAGE 130 =====
106 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
such an analysis for themselves, the details of computing a stock's volatility and pre­
dicting the call prices are provided in Chapter 28 on mathematical techniques. 
OVERPRICED OR UNDERPRICED CALLS 
Formulae exist that are capable of predicting what a call should be selling for, based 
on the relationship of the stock price and the striking price, the time remaining to 
expiration, and the volatility of the underlying stock. These are useful, for example, 
in performing the second step in the foregoing analysis, estimating the call price after 
an advance in the underlying stock. In reality, a call's actual price may deviate some­
what from the price computed by the formula. If the call is actually selling for more 
than the "fair" ( computed) price, the call is said to be overvalued. An undervalued 
call is one that is actually trading at a price that is less than the "fair" price. 
If the calls are truly overpriced, there may be a strategy that can help reduce 
their cost while still preserving upside profit potential. This strategy, however, 
requires the addition of a put spread to the call purchase, so it is beyond the scope 
of the subject matter at the current time. It is described in Chapter 23 on spreads 
combining calls and puts. 
Generally, the amount by which a call is overvalued or undervalued may be only 
a small fraction of a point, such as 10 or 20 cents. In theory, the call buyer who pur­
chases an undervalued call has gained a slight advantage in that the call should return 
to its "fair" value. However, in practice, this information is most useful only to mar­
ket-makers or firm traders who pay little or no commissions for trading options. The 
general public cannot benefit directly from the knowledge that such a small discrep­
ancy exists, because of commission costs. 
One should not base his call buying decisions merely on the fact that a call is 
underpriced. It is small solace to the call buyer to find that he bought a "cheap" call 
that subsequently declined in price. The method of ranking calls for purchase that 
has been described does, in fact, give some slight benefit to underpriced calls. 
However, under the recommended method of analysis, a call will not automatically 
appear as an attractive purchase just because it is slightly undervalued. 
TIME VALUE PREMIUM IS A MISNOMER 
This is a topic that will be mentioned several times throughout the book, most 
notably in conjunction with volatility trading. It is introduced here because even the 
inexperienced option trader must understand that the portion of an option's price 
that is not intrinsic value - the part that we routinely call "time value premium" - is 
really composed of much more than just time value. Yes, time will eventually wear 

===== PDF PAGE 131 =====
Chpter 3: Call Buying 107 
away that portion of the option's price as expiration approaches. However, when an 
option has a considerable amount of time remaining until its expiration, the more 
important component of the option value is really volatility. If traders expect the 
underlying stock to be volatile, the option will be expensive; if they expect the oppo­
site, the option will be cheap. This expensiveness and cheapness is reflected in the 
portion of the option that is not intrinsic value. For example, a six-month option will 
not decay much in one day's time, but a quick change in volatility expectations by 
option traders can heavily affect the price of the option, especially one with a good 
deal of time remaining. So an option buyer should carefully assess his purchases, not 
just view them as something that will waste away. With careful analysis, option buy­
ers can do very well, if they consider what can happen during the life of the option, 
and not merely what will happen at expiration. 
CALL BUYERS' FRUSTRATIONS 
Despite one's best efforts, it may often seem that one does not make much money 
when a fairly volatile stock makes a quick move of 3 or 4 points. The reasons for this 
are somewhat more complex than can be addressed at this time, although they relate 
strongly to delta, time decay, and the volatility of the underlying stock. They are dis­
cussed in Chapter 36, 'The Basics of Volatility Trading." If one plans to conduct a 
serious call buying strategy, he should read that chapter before embarking on a pro­
gram of extensive call buying. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
The simplest follow-up action that the call buyer can implement when the underly­
ing stock drops is to sell his call and cut his losses. There is often a natural tendency 
to hold out hope that the stock can rally back to or above the striking price. Most of 
the time, the buyer does best by cutting his losses in situations in which the stock is 
performing poorly. He might use a "mental" stop price or could actually place a sell 
stop order, depending on the rules of the exchange where the call is traded. In gen­
eral, stop orders for options result in poor executions, so using a "mental" stop is bet­
ter. That is, one should base his exit point on the technical pattern of the underlying 
stock itself. If it should break down below support, for example, then the option 
holder should place a market (not held) order to sell his call option. 
If the stock should rise, the buyer should be willing to take profits as well. Most 
buyers will quite readily take a profit if, for example, a call that was bought for 5 
points had advanced to be worth 10 points. However, the same investor is often 

===== PDF PAGE 132 =====
108 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
reluctant to sell a call at 2 that he had previously bought for 1 point, because "I've 
only made a point." The similarity is clear - both cases resulted in approximately a 
100% profit - and the investor should be as willing to accept the one as he is the 
other. This is not to imply that all calls that are bought at 1 should be sold when and 
if they get to 2, but the same factors that induce one to sell the 10-point call after 
doubling his money should apply to the 2-point call as well. 
In fact, taking partial profits after a call holding has increased in value is often 
a wise plan. For example, if someone bought a number of calls at a price of 3, and 
they later were worth 5, it might behoove the call holder to sell one-third to one-half 
of his position at 5, thereby taking a partial profit. Having done that, it is often easi­
er to let the profits run on the balance, and letting profits run is generally one of the 
keys to successful trading. 
It is rarely to the call buyer's benefit to exercise the call if he has to pay com­
missions. When one exercises a call, he pays a stock commission to buy the stock at 
the striking price. Then when the stock is sold, a stock sale commission must also be 
paid. Since option commissions are much smaller, dollarwise, than stock commis­
sions, the call holder will usually realize more net dollars by selling the call in the 
option market than by exercising it. 
LOCKING IN PROFITS 
When the call buyer is fortunate enough to see the underlying stock advance rela­
tively quickly, he can implement a number of strategies to enhance his position. 
These strategies are often useful to the call buyer who has an unrealized profit but is 
torn between taking the profit or holding on in an attempt to generate more profits 
if the underlying stock should continue to rise. 
Example: A call buyer bought an XYZ October 50 call for 3 points when the stock 
was at 48. Then the stock rises to 58. The buyer might consider selling his October 
50 (which would probably be worth about 9 points) or possibly taking one of several 
actions, some of which might involve the October 60 call, which may be selling for 3 
points. Table 3-1 summarizes the situation. At this point, the call buyer might take 
one of four basic actions: 
1. Liquidate the position by selling the long call for a profit. 
2. Sell the October 50 that he is currently long and use part of the proceeds to pur­
chase October 60's. 
3. Create a spread by selling the October 60 call against his long October 50. 
4. Do nothing and remain long the October 50 call. 

===== PDF PAGE 133 =====
Gapter 3: Call Buying 
TABLE 3-1. 
Present situation on XYZ October calls. 
Original Trade 
XYZ common: 48 
Bought XYZ October 50 at 3 
109 
Current Prices 
XYZ Common: 58 
XYZ October 50: 9 
XYZ October 60: 3 
Each of these actions would produce different levels of risk and reward from 
this point forward. If the holder sells the October 50 call, he makes a 6-point profit, 
less commissions, and terminates the position. He can realize no further appreciation 
from the call, nor can he lose any of his current profits; he has realized a 6-point gain. 
This is the least aggressive tactic of the four: If the underlying stock continues to 
advance and rises above 63, any of the other three strategies will outperform the 
complete liquidation of the call. However, if the underlying stock should instead 
decline below 50 by expiration, this action would have provided the most profit of the 
four strategies. 
The other simple tactic, the fourth one listed, is to do nothing. If the call is then 
held to expiration, this tactic would be the riskiest of the four: It is the only one that 
could produce a loss at expiration if XYZ fell back below 50. However, if the under­
lying stock continues to rise in price, more profits would accrue on the call. Every call 
buyer realizes the ramifications of these two tactics - liquidating or doing nothing 
and is generally looking for an alternative that might allow him to reduce some of his 
risk without cutting off his profit potential completely. The remaining two tactics are 
geared to this purpose: limiting the total risk while providing the opportunity for fur­
ther profits of an amount greater than those that could be realized by liquidating. 
The strategy in which the holder sells the call that he is currently holding, the 
October 50, and uses part of the proceeds to buy the call at the next higher strike is 
called rolling up. In this example, he could sell the October 50 at 9, pocket his initial 
3-point investment, and use the remaining proceeds to buy two October 60 calls at 3 
points each. Thus, it is sometimes possible for the speculator to recoup his entire 
original investment and still increase the number of calls outstanding by rolling up. 
Once this has been done, the October 60 calls will represent pure profits, whatever 
their price. The buyer who "rolls up" in this rrwnner is essentially speculating with 
someone else's money. He has put his own money back in his pocket and is using 
accrued profits to attempt to realize further gains. At expiration, this tactic would 
perform best if XYZ increased by a substantial amount. This tactic turns out to be the 

===== PDF PAGE 134 =====
110 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
worst of the four at expiration if XYZ remains near its current price, staying above 53 
but not rising above 63 in this example. 
The other alternative, the third one listed, is to continue to hold the October 50 
call but to sell the October 60 call against it. This would create what is known as a bull 
spread, and the tactic can be used only by traders who have a margin account and can 
meet their firm's minimum equity requirement for spreading (generally $2,000). This 
spread position has no risk, for the long side of the spread - the October 50 cost 3 
points, and the short side of the spread - the October 60 - brought in 3 points via its 
sale. Even if the underlying stock drops below 50 by expiration and all the calls expire 
worthless, the trader cannot lose anything except commissions. On the other hand, the 
maximum potential of this spread is 10 points, the difference between the striking 
prices of 50 and 60. This maximum potential would be realized if XYZ were anywhere 
above 60 at expiration, for at that time the October 50 call would be worth 10 points 
more than the October 60 call, regardless of how far above 60 the underlying stock 
had risen. This strategy will be the best peiformer of the four if XYZ remains relative­
ly unchanged, above the lower strike but not much above the higher strike by expira­
tion. It is interesting to note that this tactic is never the worst peiforrner of the four 
tactics, no matter where the stock is at expiration. For example, if XYZ drops below 
50, this strategy has no risk and is therefore better than the "do nothing" strategy. If 
XYZ rises substantially, this spread produces a profit of 10 points, which is better than 
the 6 points of profit offered by the "liquidate" strategy. 
There is no definite answer as to which of the four tactics is the best one to 
apply in a given situation. However, if a call can be sold against the currently long call 
to produce a bull spread that has little or no risk, it may often be an attractive thing 
to do. It can never tum out to be the worst decision, and it would produce the largest 
profits if XYZ does not rise substantially or fall substantially from its current levels. 
Tables 3-2 and 3-3 summarize the four alternative tactics, when a call holder has an 
unrealized profit. The four tactics, again, are: 
1. "Do nothing" - continue to hold the currently long call. 
2. "Liquidate" - sell the long call to take profits and do not reinvest. 
3. "Roll up" - sell the long call, pocket the original investment, and use the remain­
ing proceeds to purchase as many out-of-the-money calls as possible. 
4. "Spread" - create a bull spread by selling the out-of-the-money call against the 
currently profitable long call, preferably taking in at least the original cost of the 
long call. 

===== PDF PAGE 135 =====
Cl,apter 3: Call Buying 111 
TABLE 3-2. 
Comparison of the four alternative strategies. 
If the underlying stock then. . . The best tactic was. . . And the worst tactic was ... 
continues to rise dramatic­
ally ... 
"roll up" 
rises moderately above the do nothing 
next strike ... 
remains relatively unchanged . .. spread 
falls back below the original liquidate 
strike ... 
TABLE 3-3. 
Results at expiration. 
XYZ Price at "Roll-up" "Do Nothing" 
Expiration Profit Profit 
50 or below $ 0 -$ 300(W) 
53 0(W) 0(W) 
56 0(W) + 300 
60 0(W) + 700 
63 + 600(W) + 1,000(B) 
67 + 1,400(B) + 1,400(B) 
70 + 2,000(B) + 1,700 
liquidate 
liquidate or "roll up" 
"roll up" 
do nothing 
"Spread" 
Profit 
$ 0 
+ 300 
+ 600(B) 
+ 1,000(B) 
+ 1,000(B) 
+ 1,000 
+ 1,000 
Liquidating 
Profit 
+$600(B) 
+ 600(B) 
+ 600(B) 
+ 600 
+ 600(W) 
+ 600(W) 
+ 600(W) 
Note that each of the four tactics proves to be the best tactic in one case or another, 
but that the spread tactic is never the worst one. Tables 3-2 and 3-3 represent the 
results from holding until expiration. For those who prefer to see the actual numbers 
involved in making these comparisons between the four tactics, Table 3-3 summa­
rizes the potential profits and losses of each of the four tactics using the prices from 
the example above. 'W" indicates that the tactic is the worst one at that price, and 
"B" indicates that it is the best one. 
There are, of course, modifications that an investor might make to any of these 
tactics. For example, he might decide to sell out half of his long call position, recov­
ering a major part of his original cost, and continue to hold the remainder of the long 
calls. This still leaves room for further appreciation. 

===== PDF PAGE 136 =====
112 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
DEFENSIVE ACTION 
Two follow-up strategies are sometimes employed by the call buyer when the under­
lying stock declines in price. Both involve spread strategies; that is, being long and 
short two different calls on the same underlying stock simultaneously. Spreads are 
discussed in detail in later chapters. This discussion of spreads applies only to their 
use by the call buyer. 
·"Rolling Down." If an option holder owns an option at a currently unreal­
ized loss, it may be possible to greatly increase the chances of making a limited 
profit on a relatively small rebound in the stock price. In certain cases, the 
investor may be able to implement such a strategy at little or no increase in risk. 
Many call buyers have encountered a situation such as this: An XYZ October 35 
call was originally bought for 3 points in hopes of a quick rise in the stock price. 
However, because of downward movements in the stock- to 32, say- the call is now 
at 1 ½ with October expiration nearer. If the call buyer still expects a mild rally in the 
stock before expiration, he might either hold the call or possibly "average down" (buy 
more calls at I½). In either case he will need a rally to nearly 38 by expiration in 
order to break even. Since this would necessitate at least a 15% upward move by the 
stock before expiration, it cannot be considered very likely. Instead, the buyer should 
consider implementing the following strategy, which will be explained through the 
use of an example. 
Example: The investor is long the October 35 call at this time: 
XYZ, 32; 
XYZ October 35 call, 1 ½; and 
XYZ October 30 call, 3. 
One could sell two October 35's and, at the same time, buy one October 30 for no 
additional investment before commissions. That is, the sale of 2 October 35's at $150 
each would bring in $300, exactly the cost, before commissions, of buying the 
October 30 call. This is the key to implementing the roll-down strategy: that one be 
able to buy the lower strike call and sell two of the higher strike calls for nearly even 
money. 
Note that the investor is now short the call that he previously owned, the 
October 35. Where he previously owned one October 35, he has now sold two of 
them. He is also now long one October 30 call. Thus, his position is: 

===== PDF PAGE 137 =====
0.,,., 3: Call Buying 
long 1 XYZ October 30 call, 
1hort 1 XYZ October 35 call. 
113 
This is technically known as a bull spread, but the terminology is not important. 
Table 3-4 summarizes the transactions that the buyer has made to acquire this 
spread. The trader now "owns" the spread at a cost of $300, plus commissions. By 
making this trade, he has lowered his break-even point significantly without increas­
ing his risk. However, the maximum profit potential has also been limited; he can no 
longer capitalize on a strong rebound by the underlying stock. 
In order to see that the break-even point has been lowered, consider what the 
results are~ is at 33 at October expiration. The October 30 call would be worth 
3 points and the October 35 would expire worthless with XYZ at 33. Thus, the 
October 30 call could be sold to bring in $300 at that time, and there would not be 
any expense to buy back the October 35. Consequently, the spread could be liqui­
dated for $300, exactly the amount for which it was "bought." The spread then breaks 
even at 33 at expiration. If the call buyer had not rolled down, his break-even point 
would be 38 at expiration, for he paid 3 points for the original October 35 call and he 
would thus need XYZ to be at 38 in order to be able to liquidate the call for 3 points. 
Clearly, the stock has a better chance of recovering to 33 than to 38. Thus, the call 
buyer significantly lowers his break-even point by utilizing this strategy. 
Lowering the break-even point is not the investor's only concern. He must also 
be aware of what has happened to his profit and loss opportunities. The risk remains 
essentially the same the $300 in debits, plus commissions, that has been paid out. 
The risk has actually increased slightly, by the amount of the commissions spent in 
"rolling down." However, the stock price at which this maximum loss would be real­
ized has been lowered. With the original long call, the October 35, the buyer would 
lose the entire $300 investment anywhere below 35 at October expiration. The 
TABLE 3-4. 
Transactions in bull spread. 
Original trade 
Later trade 
Net position 
Trade 
Buy 1 October 35 call at 3 
Sell 2 October 35 calls at 1 1/2 
Buy 1 October 30 call at 3 
Long 1 October 30 call 
Short 1 October 35 call 
Cost before Commissions 
$300 debit 
$300 credit 
$300 debit 
$300 debit 

===== PDF PAGE 138 =====
114 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
spread strategy, however, would result in a total loss of $300 only if XYZ were below 
30 at October expiration. With XYZ above 30 in October, the long side of the spread 
could be liquidated for some value, thereby avoiding a total loss. The investor has 
reduced the chance of realizing the maximum loss, since the stock price at which that 
loss would occur has been lowered by 5 points. 
As with most investments, the improvement of risk exposure - lowering the 
break-even point and lowering the maximum loss price - necessitates that some 
potential reward be sacrificed. In the original long call position (the October 35), the 
maximum profit potential was unlimited. In the new position, the potential profit is 
limited to 2 points if XYZ should rally back to, or anywhere above, 35 by October 
expiration. To see this, assume XYZ is 35 at expiration. Then the long October 30 call 
would be worth 5 points, while the October 35 would expire worthless. Thus, the 
spread could be liquidated for 5 points, a 2-point profit over the 3 points paid for the 
spread. This is the limit of profit for the spread, however, since if XYZ is above 35 at 
expiration, any further profits in the long October 30 call would be offset by a corre­
sponding loss on the short October 35 call. Thus, if XYZ were to rally heavily by expi­
ration, the "rolled down" position would not realize as large a profit as the original 
long call position would have realized. 
Table 3-5 and Figure 3-2 summarize the original and new positions. Note that 
the new position is better for stock prices between 30 and 40. Below 30, the two posi­
tions are equal, except for the additional commissions spent. If the stock should rally 
back above 40, the original position would have worked out better. The new position 
is an improvement, provided that XYZ does not rally back above 40 by expiration. 
The chances that XYZ could rally 8 points, or 25%, from 32 to 40 would have to be 
considered relatively remote. Rolling the long call down into the spread would thus 
appear to be the correct thing to do in this case. 
This example is particularly attractive, because no additional money was 
required to establish the spread. In many cases, however, one may find that the long 
call cannot be rolled into the spread at even money. Some debit may be required. 
This fact should not necessarily preclude making the change, since a small addition­
al investment may still significantly increase the chance of breaking even or making 
a profit on a rebound. 
Example: The following prices now exist, rather than the ones used earlier. Only the 
October 30 call price has been altered: 
XYZ, 32; 
XYZ October 35 call, 1 ½; and 
XYZ October 30 call, 4. 

===== PDF PAGE 139 =====
O.,ter 3: Call Buying 
TABLE 3-5. 
Original and spread positions compared. 
Stock Price Long Call 
at Expiration Result 
25 -$300 
30 - 300 
33 - 300 
35 - 300 
38 0 
40 + 200 
45 + 700 
FIGURE 3-2. 
Companion: original call purchase vs. spread. 
§ 
~ +$200 
·5.. 
~ 
al 
tJ) 
.3 
0 
:1: 
e 
c.. -$300 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Spread 
Result 
-$300 
- 300 
0 
+ 200 
+ 200 
+ 200 
+ 200 
115 
With these prices, a 1-point debit would be required to roll down. That is, selling 2 
October 35 calls would bring in $300 ($150 each), but the cost of buying the October 
30 call is $400. Thus, the transaction would have to be done at a cost of $100, plus 
commissions. With these prices, the break-even point after rolling down would be 34, 
still well below the original break-even price of 38. The risk has now been increased 
by the additional 1 point spent to roll down. If XYZ should drop below 30 at October 
expiration, the investor would have a total loss of 4 points plus commissions. The 
maximum loss with the original long October 35 call was limited to 3 points plus a 
smaller amount of commissions. Finally, the maximum amount of money that the 

===== PDF PAGE 140 =====
116 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
spread could make is now $100, less commissions. The alternative in this example is 
not nearly as attractive as the previous one, but it might still be worthwhile for the 
call buyer to invoke such a spread if he feels that XYZ has limited rally potential up 
to October expiration. 
One should not automatically discard the use of this strategy merely because a 
debit is required to convert the long call to a spread. Note that to "average down" by 
buying an additional October 35 call at 1 ½ would require an additional investment 
of $150. This is more than the $100 required to convert into the spread position in 
the immediately preceding example. The break-even point on the position that was 
"averaged down" would be over 37 at expiration, whereas the break-even point on the 
spread is 34. Admittedly, the averaged-down position has much more profit potential 
than the spread does, but the conversion to the spread is less expensive than "aver­
aging down" and also provides a lower break-even price. 
In summary, then, if the call buyer finds himself with an unrealized loss because 
the stock has declined, and yet is unwilling to sell, he may be able to improve his 
chances of breaking even by "rolling down" into a spread. That is, he would sell 2 of 
the calls that he is currently long - the one that he owns plus another one - and 
simultaneously buy one call at the next lower striking price. If this transaction of sell­
ing 2 calls and buying 1 call can be done for approximately even money, it could def­
initely be to the buyer's benefit to implement this strategy, because the break-even 
point would be lowered considerably and the buyer would have a much better 
chance of getting out even or making a small profit should the underlying stock have 
a small rebound. 
Creating a Calendar Spread. A different type of defensive spread strategy 
is sometimes used by the call buyer who finds that the underlying stock has declined. 
In this strategy, the holder of an intermediate- or long-term call sells a near-term call, 
with the same striking price as the call he already owns. This creates what is known 
as a calendar spread. The idea behind doing this is that if the short-term call expires 
worthless, the overall cost of the long call will be reduced to the buyer. Then, if the 
stock should rally, the call buyer has a better chance of making a profit. 
Example: Suppose that an investor bought an XYZ October 35 call for 3 points some­
time in April. By June the stock has fallen to 32, and it appears that the stock might 
remain depressed for a while longer. The holder of the October 35 call might con­
sider selling a July 35 call, perhaps for a price of 1 point. Should XYZ remain below 
35 until July expiration, the short call would expire worthless, earning a small, 1-point 
profit. The investor would still own the October 35 call and would then hope for a 
rally by XYZ before October in order to make profits on that call. Even if XYZ does 

===== PDF PAGE 141 =====
Chpter 3: Call Buying 117 
not rally by October, he has decreased his overall loss by the amount received for the 
sale of the July 35 call. 
This strategy is not as attractive to use as the previous one. If XYZ should rally 
before July expiration, the investor might find himself with two losing positions. For 
example, suppose that XYZ rallied back to 36 in the next week. His short call that he 
sold for 1 point would be selling for something more than that, so he would have an 
unrealized loss on the short July 35. In addition, the October 35 would probably not 
have appreciated back to its original price of 3, and he would therefore have an unre­
alized loss on that side of the spread as well. 
Consequently, this strategy should be used with great caution, for if the under­
lying stock rallies quickly before the near-term expiration, the spread could be at a 
loss on both sides. Note that in the former spread strategy, this could not happen. 
Even if XYZ rallied quickly, some profit would be made on the rebound. 
A FURTHER COMMENT ON SPREADS 
Anyone not familiar with the margin requirements for spreads, under both the 
exchange margin rules and the rules of the brokerage firm he is dealing with, should 
not attempt to utilize a spread transaction. Later chapters on spreads outline the 
more common requirements for spread transactions. In general, one must have a 
margin account to establish a spread and must have a minimum amount of equity in 
the account. Thus, the call buyer who operates in a cash account cannot necessarily 
use these spread strategies. To do so might incur a margin call and possible restric­
tion of one's trading account. Therefore, check on specific requirements before uti­
lizing a spread strategy. Do not assume that a long call can automatically be "rolled" 
into any sort of spread. 

===== PDF PAGE 142 =====
Other Call Buying Strategies 
In this chapter, two additional strategies that utilize the purchase of call options are 
described. Both of these strategies involve buying calls against the short sale of the 
underlying stock. When listed puts are traded on the underlying stock, these strate­
gies are often less effective than when they are implemented with the use of put 
options. However, the concept is important, and sometimes these strategies are more 
viable in markets where calls are ve:iy liquid but puts are not. These strategies are 
generally known as "synthetic" strategies. 
THE PROTECTED SHORT SALE (OR SYNTHETIC PUT) 
Purchasing a call at the same time that one is short the underlying stock is a means 
of limiting the risk of the short sale to a fixed amount. Since the risk is theoretically 
unlimited in a short sale, many investors are reluctant to use the strategy. Even for 
those investors who do sell stock short, it can be rather upsetting if the stock rises in 
price. One may be forced into an emotional - and perhaps incorrect - decision to 
cover the short sale in order to relieve the psychological pressure. By owning a call 
at the same time he is short, the investor limits the risk to a fixed and generally small 
amount. 
Example: An investor sells XYZ short at 40 and simultaneously purchases an XYZ 
July 40 call for 3 points. If XYZ falls in price, the short seller will make his profit on 
the short sale, less the 3 points paid for the call, which will expire worthless. Thus, by 
buying the call for protection, a small amount of profit potential is sacrificed. 
However, the advantage of owning the call is demonstrated when the results are 
examined for a stock rise. IfXYZ should rise to any price above 40 by July expiration, 
118 

===== PDF PAGE 143 =====
Cl,apter 4: Other Call Buying Strategies 119 
the short seller can cover his short by exercising the long call and buying stock at 40. 
Thus, the maximum risk that the short seller can incur in this example is the 3 points 
paid for the call. Table 4-1 and Figure 4-1 depict the results at expiration from uti­
lizing this strategy. Commissions are not included. Note that the break-even point is 
37 in this example. That is, if the stock drops 3 points, the protected short sale posi­
tion will break even because of the 3-point loss on the call. The short seller who did 
not spend the extra money for the long call would, of course, have a 3-point profit at 
37. To the upside, however, the protected short sale outperforms a regular short sale 
if the stock climbs anywhere above 43. At 43, both types of short sales have $300 loss­
es. But above that level, the loss would continue to grow for a regular short sale, while 
it is fixed for the short seller who also bought a call. In either case, the short seller's 
risk is increased slightly by the fact that he is obligated to pay out the dividends on 
the underlying stock, if any are declared. 
A simple formula is available for determining the maximum amount of risk 
when one protects a short sale by buying a call option: 
Risk = Striking price of purchased call + Call price - Stock price 
Depending on how much risk the short seller is willing to absorb, he might want to 
buy an out-of-the-money call as protection rather than an at-the-money call, as was 
shown in the example above. A smaller dollar amount is spent for the protection 
when one buys an out-of-the-money call, so that the short seller does not give away 
as much of his profit potential. However, his risk is larger because the call does not 
start its protective qualities until the stock goes above the striking price. 
Example: With XYZ at 40, the short seller of XYZ buys the July 45 call at ½ for pro­
tection. His maximum possible loss, if XYZ is above 45 at July expiration, would be 
TABLE 4-1. 
Results at expiration-protected short sale. 
XYZ Price at Profit Call Price at Profit Total 
Expiration on XYZ Expiration on Call Profit 
20 +$2,000 0 -$ 300 +$1,700 
30 + 1,000 0 - 300 + 700 
37 + 300 0 - 300 0 
40 0 0 - 300 300 
50 - 1,000 10 + 700 300 
60 - 2,000 20 + 1,700 300 

===== PDF PAGE 144 =====
120 
FIGURE 4-1. 
Protected short sale. 
C: 
0 .:; 
~ 
'a.. X 
UJ 
1o +$0 en en 
0 
...J 
0 
-e 
0.-$300 
40' 
', 
Stock Price at Expiration 
' 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
43 
', ', ' ', ' ', 
Short ', 
' Sale 'll 
5½ points - the five points between the current stock price of 40 and the striking 
price of 45, plus the amount paid for the call. On the other hand, if XYZ declines, the 
protected short seller will make nearly as much as the short seller who did not pro­
tect, since he only spent ½ point for the long call. 
If one buys an in-the-nwney call as protection for the short sale, his risk will be 
quite minimal. However, his profit potential will be severely limited. As an example, 
with XYZ at 40, if one had purchased a July 35 call at 5½, his risk would be limited 
to½ point anywhere above 35 at July expiration. Unfortunately, he would not realize 
any profit on the position until the stock went below 34½, a drop of 5½ points. This 
is too much protection, for it limits the profit so severely that there is only a small 
hope of making a profit. 
Generally, it is best to buy a call that is at-the-nwney or only slightly out-of the­
money as the protection for the short sale. It is not of much use to buy a deeply out­
of-the-money call as protection, since it does very little to moderate risk unless the 
stock climbs quite dramatically. Normally, one would cover a short sale before it went 
heavily against him. Thus, the money spent for such a deeply out-of-the-money call 
is wasted. However, if one wants to give a short sale plenty of room to "work" and 

===== PDF PAGE 145 =====
Cl,opter 4: Other Call Buying Strategies 121 
feels ve:ry certain that his bearish view of the stock is the correct view, he might then 
buy a fairly deep out-of-the-money call just as disaster protection, in case the stock 
suddenly bolted upward in price (if it received a takeover bid, for example). 
MARGIN REQUIREMENTS 
The newest margin rules now allow one to receive favorable margin treatment when 
a short sale of stock is protected by a long call option. The margin required is the 
lower of (1) 10% of the call's striking price plus any out-of-the-money amount, or (2) 
30% of the current short stock's market value. The position will be marked to market 
daily, and most brokers will require that the short sale be margined at "normal" rates 
if the stock is below the strike price. 
Example: Suppose the following prices exist: 
XYZ Common stock: 47 
Oct 40 call: 8 
Oct 50 call: 3 
Oct 60 call: 1 
Suppose that one is considering a short sale of 100 shares of XYZ at 47 and the 
purchase of one of the calls as protection. Here are the margin requirements for the 
various strike prices. (Note that the option price, per se, is not part of the margin 
requirement, but all options must be paid for in full, initially). 
Position 
Short XYZ, long Oct 40 call 
Short XYZ, long Oct 50 call 
Short XYZ, long Oct 60 call 
l 0% strike + out-of-the-money 
400 + 0 = 400* 
500 + 300 = 800* 
600 + 1,300 = 1,900 
30% stock price 
1,410 
1,410 
1,41 0* 
*Since the margin requirement is the lower of the two figures, the items marked with an asterisk in 
this table are the margin requirements. 
Again, remember that the long call would have to be paid for in full, and that most 
brokers impose a maintenance requirement of at least the value of the short sale itself 
as long as the stock is below the strike price of the long call, in addition to the above 
requirements. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 5 | PDF PAGES 156-169 =====

===== PDF PAGE 156 =====
CHAPTER 5 
Naked Call Writing 
The next two chapters will concentrate on various aspects of writing uncovered call 
options. These strategies have risk ofloss if the underlying stock should rise in price, 
but they offer profits if the underlying stock declines in price. This chapter on 
naked, or uncovered, call writing - demonstrates some of the risks and rewards 
inherent in this aggressive strategy. Novice option traders often think that selling 
naked options is the "best" way to make money, because of time decay. In addition, 
they often assume that market-makers and other professionals sell a lot of naked 
options. In reality, neither is true. Yes, options do eventually lose their premium if 
held all the way until expiration. However, when an option has a good deal of life 
remaining, its excess value above intrinsic value what we call "time value premium" 
- is, in reality, heavily influenced by the volatility estimate of the stock. This is called 
implied volatility and is discussed at length later in the book. For now, though, it is 
sufficient to understand that a lot can go wrong when one writes a naked option, 
before it eventually expires. As to professionals selling a lot of naked options, the fact 
is that most market-makers and other full-time option traders attempt to reduce their 
exposure to large stock price movements if possible. Hence, they may sell some 
options naked, but they generally try to hedge them by buying other options or by 
buying the underlying stock. 
Many novice option traders hold these misconceptions, probably because there 
is a general belief that most options expire worthless. Occasionally, one will even hear 
or see a statement to this effect in the mainstream media, but it is not true that most 
options expire worthless. In fact, studies conducted by McMillan Analysis Corp. in 
both bull and bear months indicate that about 65% to 70% of all options have some 
value (at least half a point) when they expire. This is not to say that all option buyers 
make money, either, but it does serve to show that many more options do not expire 
worthless than do. 
132 

===== PDF PAGE 157 =====
Qapter 5: Naked Call Writing 133 
THE UNCOVERED (NAKED) CALL OPTION 
When one sells a call option without owning the underlying stock or any equivalent 
security (convertible stock or bond or another call option), he is considered to have 
written an uncovered call option. This strategy has limited profit potential and theo­
retically unlimited loss. For this reason, this strategy is unsuitable for some investors. 
This fact is not particularly attractive, but since there is no actual cash investment 
required to write a naked call ( the position can be financed with collateral loan value 
of marginable securities), the strategy can be operated as an adjunct to many other 
investment strategies. 
A simple example will outline the basic profit and loss potential from naked 
writing. 
Example: XYZ is selling at 50 and a July 50 call is selling for 5. If one were to sell the 
July 50 call naked - that is, without owning XYZ stock, or any security convertible into 
XYZ, or another call option on XYZ - he could make, at most, 5 points of profit. This 
profit would accrue if XYZ were at or anywhere below 50 at July expiration, as the 
call would then expire worthless. If XYZ were to rise, however, the naked writer 
could potentially lose large sums of money. Should the stock climb to 100, say, the 
call would be at a price of 50. If the writer then covered (bought back) the call for a 
price of 50, he would have a loss of 45 points on the transaction. In theory, this loss 
is unlimited, although in practice the loss is limited by time. The stock cannot rise an 
infinite amount during the life of the call. Clearly, defensive strategies are important 
in this approach, as one would never want to let a loss run as far as the one here. 
Table 5-1 and Figure 5-1 (solid line) depict the results of this position at July expira­
tion. Note that the break-even point in this example is 55. That is, if XYZ rose 10%, 
or 5 points, at expiration, the naked writer would break even. He could buy the call 
back at parity, 5 points, which is exactly what he sold it for. There is some room for 
error to the upside. A naked write will not necessarily lose money if the stock moves 
up. It will only lose if the stock advances by more than the amount of the time value 
premium that was in the call when it was originally written. 
Naked writing is not the same as a short sale of the underlying stock. While both 
strategies have large potential risk, the short sale has much higher reward potential, 
but the naked write will do better if the underlying stock remains relatively 
unchanged. It is possible for the naked writer to make money in situations when the 
short seller would have lost money. Using the example above, suppose one investor 
had written the July 50 call naked for 5 points while another investor sold the stock 
short at 50. If XYZ were at 52 at expiration, the naked writer could buy the call back 
at parity, 2 points, for a 3-point profit. The short seller would have a 2-point loss. 

===== PDF PAGE 158 =====
134 
TABLE 5-1. 
Position at July expiration. 
XYZ Price at Call Price at 
Expiration Expiration 
30 0 
40 0 
50 0 
55 5 
60 10 
70 20 
80 30 
FIGURE 5-1. 
Uncovered (naked) call write. 
+$500 
C 
0 
~ ·15.. 
X 
w 
cu 
(/J 
~ ...I 
0 
lt, 
.... ...... 
", Naked Write 
45 SO', 
.... .. .... .. .. Short Sale ,, 
.. .. 
Stock Price at Expiration 
.. 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Profit on 
Naked Write 
+$ 500 
+ 500 
+ 500 
0 
500 
- 1,500 
- 2,500 
.. .... .. 
~ 
Moreover, the short seller pays out the dividends on the underlying stock, whereas 
the naked call writer does not. The naked call will expire, of course, but the short sale 
does not. This is a situation in which the naked write outperforms the short sale. 
However, ifXYZ were to fall sharply- to 20, say- the naked writer could only make 
5 points while the short seller would make 30 points. The dashed line in Figure 5-1 
shows how the short sale of XYZ at 50 would compare with the naked write of the 
July 50 call. Notice that the two strategies are equal at 45 at expiration; they both 

===== PDF PAGE 159 =====
Cl,apter 5: Naked Call Writing 135 
make a 5-point profit there. Above 45, the naked write does better; it has larger prof­
its and smaller losses. Below 45, the short sale does better, and the farther the stock 
falls, the better the short sale becomes in comparison. As will be seen later, one can 
more closely simulate a short sale by writing an in-the-money naked call. 
INVESTMENT REQUIRED 
The margin requirements for writing a naked call are 20% of the stock price plus the 
call premium, less the amount by which the stock is below the striking price. If the 
stock is below the striking price, the differential is subtracted from the requirement. 
However, a minimum of 10% of the stock price is required for each call, even if the 
C-'Omputation results in a smaller number. Table 5-2 gives four examples of how the ini­
tial margin requirement would be computed for four different stock prices. The 20% 
collateral figure is the minimum exchange requirement and may vary somewhat among 
different brokerage houses. The call premium may be applied against the requirement. 
In the first line of Table 5-2, if the XYZ July 50 call were selling for 7 points, the $700 
call premium could be applied against the $1,800 margin requirement, reducing the 
actual amount that the investor would have to put up as collateral to $1,100. 
TABLE 5-2. 
Initial collateral requirements for four stock prices. 
Coll 
Written 
XYZ July 50 
XYZ July 50 
XYZ July 50 
XYZ July 50 
Stock Price When 
Coll Written 
55 
50 
46 
40 
*Requirement cannot be less than 10%. 
Coll 
Price 
$700 
400 
200 
100 
20% of 
Stock Price 
$1,100 
1,000 
920 
800 
Out-of-the­
Money 
Differential 
$ 0 
0 
400 
- 1,000 
Total Margin 
Requirement 
$1,800 
1,400 
720 
400* 
In addition to the basic requirements, a brokerage firm may require that for a 
customer to participate in uncovered writing, he have a minimum equity in his 
account. This equity requirement may range from as low as $2,000 to as high as 
$100,000. Since naked call writing is a high-risk strategy, some brokerage firms 
require that the customer be able to show both financial wherewithal and option 

===== PDF PAGE 160 =====
136 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
trading experience before the account can be approved for naked call writing. In 
addition, some brokers require that a maintenance requirement be applied against 
each option written naked. This requirement, sometimes called a kicker, is usually 
less than $250 per call and is generally used by the broker to ensure that, should the 
customer fail to respond to an assignment notice against his naked call, the commis­
sion costs for buying and selling the underlying stock would be defrayed. 
Naked Option Positions Are Marked to the Market Daily. This 
means that the collateral requirement for the position is recomputed daily, just as in 
the short sale of stock. The same margin formula that was described above is applied 
and, if the stock has risen far enough, the customer will be required to deposit addi­
tional collateral or close the position. The need for such a mark to market is obvious. 
If the underlying stock should rise, the brokerage firm must ensure that the customer 
has enough collateral to cover the eventuality of buying the stock in the open market 
and selling it at the striking price if an assignment notice should be received against 
the naked call. The mark to market works to the customer's favor if the stock falls in 
price. Excess collateral is then released back into the customer's margin account, and 
may be used for other purposes. 
It is important to realize that, in order to write a naked call, collateral is all that 
is required. No cash need be "invested" if one owns securities with sufficient collat­
eral loan value. 
Example: An investor owns 100 shares of a stock selling at $60 per share. This stock 
is worth $6,000. If the loan rate on stock is 50% of $6,000, this investor has a collat­
eral loan value equal to 50% of $6,000, or $3,000. This investor could write any of the 
naked calls in Table 5-2 without adding cash or securities to his account. Moreover, 
he would have satisfied a minimum equity requirement of at least $6,000, since his 
stock is equity. 
This aspect of naked call writing - using collateral value to finance the writing 
- is attractive to many investors, since one is able to write calls and bring in premi­
ums without disturbing his existing portfolio. Of course, if the stock underlying the 
naked call should rise too far in price, additional collateral may be called for by the 
broker because of the mark to market. Moreover, there is risk whether cash or col­
lateral is used. If one buys in a naked call at a loss, he will then be spending cash, cre­
ating a debit in his account. 
Regardless of how one finances a naked option position, it is generally a good 
idea to allow enough collateral so that the stock can move all the way to the point at 
which one would cover the option or take follow-up action. For example, suppose a 

===== PDF PAGE 161 =====
136 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
trading experience before the account can be approved for naked call writing. In 
addition, some brokers require that a maintenance requirement be applied against 
each option written naked. This requirement, sometimes called a kicker, is usually 
less than $250 per call and is generally used by the broker to ensure that, should the 
customer fail to respond to an assignment notice against his naked call, the commis­
sion costs for buying and selling the underlying stock would be defrayed. 
Naked Option Positions Are Marked to the Market Daily. This 
means that the collateral requirement for the position is recomputed daily, just as in 
the short sale of stock. The same margin formula that was described above is applied 
and, if the stock has risen far enough, the customer will be required to deposit addi­
tional collateral or close the position. The need for such a mark to market is obvious. 
If the underlying stock should rise, the brokerage firm must ensure that the customer 
has enough collateral to cover the eventuality of buying the stock in the open market 
and selling it at the striking price if an assignment notice should be received against 
the naked call. The mark to market works to the customer's favor if the stock falls in 
price. Excess collateral is then released back into the customer's margin account, and 
may be used for other purposes. 
It is important to realize that, in order to write a naked call, collateral is all that 
is required. No cash need be "invested" if one owns securities with sufficient collat­
eral loan value. 
Example: An investor owns 100 shares of a stock selling at $60 per share. This stock 
is worth $6,000. If the loan rate on stock is 50% of $6,000, this investor has a collat­
eral loan value equal to 50% of $6,000, or $3,000. This investor could write any of the 
naked calls in Table 5-2 without adding cash or securities to his account. Moreover, 
he would have satisfied a minimum equity requirement of at least $6,000, since his 
stock is equity. 
This aspect of naked call writing - using collateral value to finance the writing 
- is attractive to many investors, since one is able to write calls and bring in premi­
ums without disturbing his existing portfolio. Of course, if the stock underlying the 
naked call should rise too far in price, additional collateral may be called for by the 
broker because of the mark to market. Moreover, there is risk whether cash or col­
lateral is used. If one buys in a naked call at a loss, he will then be spending cash, cre­
ating a debit in his account. 
Regardless of how one finances a naked option position, it is generally a good 
idea to allow enough collateral so that the stock can move all the way to the point at 
which one would cover the option or take follow-up action. For example, suppose a 

===== PDF PAGE 162 =====
136 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
trading experience before the account can be approved for naked call writing. In 
addition, some brokers require that a maintenance requirement be applied against 
each option written naked. This requirement, sometimes called a kicker, is usually 
less than $250 per call and is generally used by the broker to ensure that, should the 
customer fail to respond to an assignment notice against his naked call, the commis­
sion costs for buying and selling the underlying stock would be defrayed. 
Naked Option Positions Are Marked to the Market Daily. This 
means that the collateral requirement for the position is recomputed daily, just as in 
the short sale of stock. The same margin formula that was described above is applied 
and, if the stock has risen far enough, the customer will be required to deposit addi­
tional collateral or close the position. The need for such a mark to market is obvious. 
If the underlying stock should rise, the brokerage firm must ensure that the customer 
has enough collateral to cover the eventuality of buying the stock in the open market 
and selling it at the striking price if an assignment notice should be received against 
the naked call. The mark to market works to the customer's favor if the stock falls in 
price. Excess collateral is then released back into the customer's margin account, and 
may be used for other purposes. 
It is important to realize that, in order to write a naked call, collateral is all that 
is required. No cash need be "invested" if one owns securities with sufficient collat­
eral loan value. 
Example: An investor owns 100 shares of a stock selling at $60 per share. This stock 
is worth $6,000. If the loan rate on stock is 50% of $6,000, this investor has a collat­
eral loan value equal to 50% of $6,000, or $3,000. This investor could write any of the 
naked calls in Table 5-2 without adding cash or securities to his account. Moreover, 
he would have satisfied a minimum equity requirement of at least $6,000, since his 
stock is equity. 
This aspect of naked call writing - using collateral value to finance the writing 
- is attractive to many investors, since one is able to write calls and bring in premi­
ums without disturbing his existing portfolio. Of course, if the stock underlying the 
naked call should rise too far in price, additional collateral may be called for by the 
broker because of the mark to market. Moreover, there is risk whether cash or col­
lateral is used. If one buys in a naked call at a loss, he will then be spending cash, cre­
ating a debit in his account. 
Regardless of how one finances a naked option position, it is generally a good 
idea to allow enough collateral so that the stock can move all the way to the point at 
which one would cover the option or take follow-up action. For example, suppose a 

===== PDF PAGE 163 =====
Gapter 5: Naked Call Writing 137 
stock is trading at 50 and one sells an April 60 call naked, figuring that he will cover 
the call if the stock rises to 60 ( that is, if the option becomes an in-the-money option). 
He should set aside enough collateral to margin the position as if the stock were at 
60 (even though the actual margin requirement will be smaller than that). If he 
allows that extra collateral, then he will never be forced into a margin call at a stock 
price prior to (that is, below) where he wanted to take follow-up action. Simply stat­
ed, let the market take you out of a position, not a margin call. 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF SELLING NAKED OPTIONS 
The first and foremost question one must address when thinking about selling naked 
options (or any strategy, for that matter) is: "Can I psychologically handle the thought 
of naked options in my account?" Notice that the question does not have anything to 
do with whether one has enough collateral or margin to sell calls (although that, too, 
is important) nor does it ask how much money he will make. First, one must decide 
if he can be comfortable with the risk of the strategy. Selling naked options means 
that there is theoretically unlimited risk if the underlying instrument should make a 
large, sudden, adverse move. It is one's attitude regarding that fact alone that deter­
mines whether he should consider selling naked options. If one feels that he won't be 
able to sleep at night, then he should not sell naked options, regardless of any profit 
projections that might seem attractive. 
If one feels that the psychological suitability aspect is not a roadblock, then he 
can consider whether he has the financial wherewithal to write naked options. On the 
surface, naked option margin requirements are not large (although in equity and 
index options, they are larger than they were prior to the crash of 1987). 
In general, one would prefer to let the naked options expire worthless, if at all 
possible, without disturbing them, unless the underlying instrument makes a signifi­
cant adverse move. So, out-of-the-money options are the usual choice for naked sell­
ing. Then, in order to reduce ( or almost eliminate) the chance of a margin call, one 
should set aside the margin requirement as if the underlying had already rrwved to 
the strike price of the option sold. By allowing margin as if the underlying were 
already at the strike, one will almost never experience a margin call before the under­
lying price trades up to the strike price, at which time it is best to close the position 
or to roll the call to another strike. 
Thus, for naked equity call options, allow as collateral 20% of the highest naked 
strike price. In this author's opinion, the biggest mistake a trader can make is to ini­
tiate trades because of margin or taxes. Thus, by allowing the "maximum" margin, 
one can make trading decisions based on what's happening in the market, as opposed 
to reacting to a margin call from his broker. 

===== PDF PAGE 164 =====
138 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
"Suitability" also means not risking nwre nwney than one can afford to lose. If 
one allows the "maximum" margin, then he won't be risking a large portion of his 
equity unless he is unable to cover when the underlying trades through the strike 
price of his naked option. Gaps in trading prices would be the culprits that could pre­
vent one from covering. Gaps are common in stocks, less common in futures, and 
almost nonexistent in indices. Hence, index options are the options of choice when it 
comes to naked writing. Index options are discussed later in the book. 
Finally, there is one more "rule" that a naked option writer must follow: 
Someone has to be watching the position at all times. Disasters could occur if one 
were to go on vacation and not pay attention to his naked options. Usually, one's bro­
ker can watch the position, even if the trader has to call him from his vacation site. 
In sum, then, to write naked options, one needs to be prepared psychological­
ly, have sufficient funds, be willing to accept the risk, be able to monitor the position 
every day, sell options whose implied volatility is extremely high, and cover any naked 
options that become in-the-money options. 
RISK AND REWARD 
One can adjust the apparent risks and rewards from naked call writing by his selec­
tion of an in-the-money or out-of-the-money call. Writing an out-of-the-money call 
naked, especially one quite deeply out-of-the-money, offers a high probability of 
achieving a small profit. Writing an in-the-money call naked has the most profit 
potential, but it also has higher risks. 
Example: XYZ is selling at 40 and the July 50 is selling for½. This call could be sold 
naked. The probability that XYZ could rise to 50 by expiration has to be considered 
small, especially if there is not a large amount of time remaining in the life of the call. 
In fact, the stock could rise 25%, or 10 points, by expiration to a price of 50, and the 
call would still expire worthless. Thus, this naked writer has a good chance of realiz­
ing a $50 profit, less commissions. There could, of course, be substantial risk in terms 
of potential profit versus potential loss if the stock rises substantially in price by expi­
ration. Still, this apparent possibility of achieving additional limited income with a 
high probability of success has led many investors to use the collateral value of their 
portfolios to sell deeply out-of-the-money naked calls. 
For those employing this technique, a favored position is to have a stock at or 
just about 15 and then sell the near-term option with striking price 20 naked. This 
option would sell for one-eighth or one-quarter, perhaps, although at times there 
might not be any bid at all. At this price, the stock would have to rally nearly one-

===== PDF PAGE 165 =====
C.,,er 5: Naked Call Writing 139 
third, or 33%, for the writer to lose money. Although there are not usually many 
optionable stocks selling at or just above $10 per share, these same out-of-the-money 
writers would also be attracted to selling a call with a striking price 15 when the stock 
is at 10, because a 50% upward move by the stock would be required for a loss to be 
realized. 
This strategy of selling deeply out-of-the-money calls has its apparent attraction 
in that the writer is assured of a profit unless the underlying stock can rally rather 
substantially before the call expires. The danger in this strategy is that one or two 
losses, perhaps amounting to only a couple of points each, could wipe out many peri­
ods of profits. The stock market does occasionally rally heavily in a short period, as 
witnessed repeatedly throughout history. Thus, the writer who is adopting this strat­
egy cannot regard it as a sure thing and certainly cannot afford to establish the writes 
and forget them. Close monitoring is required in case the market begins to rally, and 
by no means should losses be allowed to accumulate. 
The opposite end of the spectrum in naked call writing is the writing of fairly 
deeply in-the-money calls. Since an in-the-money call would not have much time 
value premium in it, this writer does not have much leeway to the upside. If the 
stock rallies at all, the writer of the deeply in-the-money naked call will normally 
experience a loss. However, should the stock drop in price, this writer will make 
larger dollar profits than will the writer of the out-of-the-money call. The sale of the 
deeply in-the-money call simulates the profits that a short seller could make, at least 
until the stock drops close to the striking price, since the delta of a deeply in-the­
money call is close to 1. 
Example: XYZ is selling at 60 and the July 50 call is selling for 10½. IfXYZ rises, the 
naked writer will lose money, because there is only ½ of a point of time value pre­
mium in the call. If XYZ falls, the writer will make profits on a point-for-point basis 
until the stock falls much closer to 50. That is, if XYZ dropped from 60 to 57, the call 
price would fall by almost 3 points as well. Thus, for quick declines by the stock, the 
deeply in-the-money write can provide profits nearly equal to those that the short 
seller could accumulate. Notice that if XYZ falls all the way to 50, the profits on the 
written call will be large, but will be accumulating at a slower rate as the time value 
premium builds up with the stock near the striking price. 
If one is looking to trade a stock on the short side for just a few points of nwve­
ment, he might use a deeply in-the-nwney naked write instead of shorting the stock. 
His investment will be smaller - 20% of the stock price for the write as compared to 
50% of the stock price for the short sale - and his return will thus be larger. (The 
requirement for the in-the-money amount is offset by applying the call's premium.) 

===== PDF PAGE 166 =====
140 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
The writer should take great caution in ascertaining that the call does have some time 
premium in it. He does not want to receive an assignment notice on the written call. 
It is easiest to find time premium in the more distant expiration series, so the writer 
would normally be safest from assignment by writing the longest-term deep in-the­
money call if he wants to make a bearish trade in the stock. 
Example: An investor thinks that XYZ could fall 3 or 4 points from its current price 
of 60 in a quick downward move, and wants to capitalize on that move by writing a 
naked call. If the April 40 were the near-term call, he might have the choice of sell­
ing the April 40 at 20, the July 40 at 20¼, or the October 40 at 20½. Since all three 
calls will drop nearly point for point with the stock in a move to 56 or 57, he should 
write the October 40, as it has the least risk of being assigned. A trader utilizing this 
strategy should limit his losses in much the same way a short seller would, by cover­
ing if the stock rallies, perhaps breaking through overhead technical resistance. 
ROLLING FOR CREDITS 
Most writers of naked calls prefer to use one of the two strategies described above. 
The strategy of writing at-the-money calls, when the stock price is initially close to the 
striking price of the written call, is not widely utilized. This is because the writer who 
wants to limit risk will write an out-of-the-money call, whereas the writer who wants 
to make larger, quick trading profits will write an in-the-money call. There is, how­
ever, a strategy that is designed to utilize the at-the-money call. This strategy offers a 
high degree of eventual success, although there may be an accumulation of losses 
before the success point is reached. It is a strategy that requires large collateral back­
ing, and is therefore only for the largest investors. We call this strategy "rolling for 
credits." The strategy is described here in full, although it can, at times, resemble a 
Martingale strategy; that is, one that requires "doubling up" to succeed, and one that 
can produce ruin if certain physical limits are reached. The classic Martingale strat­
egy is this: Begin by betting one unit; if you lose, double your bet; if you win that bet, 
you'll have netted a profit of one unit (you lost one, but won two); if you lost the sec­
ond bet, double your bet again. No matter how many times you lose, keep doubling 
your bet each time. When you eventually win, you will profit by the amount of your 
original bet (one unit). Unfortunately, such a strategy cannot be employed in real life. 
For example, in a gambling casino, after enough losses, one would bump up against 
the table limit and would no longer be able to double his bet. Consequently, the strat­
egy would be ruined just when it was at its worst point. While "rolling for credits" 
doesn't exactly call for one to double the number of written calls each time, it does 
require that one keep increasing his risk exposure in order to profit by the amount of 
that original credit sold. In general, Martingale strategies should be avoided. 

===== PDF PAGE 167 =====
Cl,apter 5: Naked Call Writing 141 
In essence, the writer who is rollingf or credits sells the most time premium that 
he can at any point in time. This would generally be the longest-term, at-the-money 
call. If the stock declines, the writer makes the time premium that he sold. However, 
if the stock rises in price, the writer rolls up for a credit. That is, when the stock 
reaches the next higher striking price, the writer buys back the calls that were origi­
nally sold and sells enough long-term calls at the higher strike to generate a credit. 
In this way, no debits are incurred, although a realized loss is taken on the rolling up. 
If the stock persists and rises to the next striking price, the process is repeated. 
Eventually, the stock will stop rising - they always do - and the last set of written 
options will expire worthless. At that time, the writer would make an overall profit 
consisting of an amount equal to all the credits that he had taken in so far. In reality, 
most of that credit will simply be the initial credit received. The "rolls" are done for 
even money or a small credit. In essence, the increased risk generated by continual­
ly rolling up is all geared toward eventually capturing that initial credit. The similar­
ity to the Martingale strategy is strongest in this regard: One continually increases his 
risk, knowing that when he eventually wins (i.e., the last set of options expires worth­
less), he profits by the amount of his original "bet." 
There are really only two requirements for success in this strategy. The first is 
that the underlying stock eventually fall back, that it does not rise indefinitely. This is 
hardly a requirement; it is axiomatic that all stocks will eventually undergo a correc­
tion, so this is a simple requirement to satisfy. The second requirement is that the 
investor have enough collateral backing to stay with the strategy even if the stock runs 
up heavily against him. 
This is a much harder requirement to satisfy, and may in fact tum out to be 
nearly impossible to satisfy. If the stock were to experience a straight-line upward 
move, the number of calls written might grow so substantially that they would 
require an unrealistically large amount of collateral (margin). At a minimum, this 
strategy is applicable only for the largest investors. For such well-collateralized 
investors, this strategy can be thought of as a way to add income to a portfolio. That 
is, a large stock portfolio's equity may be used to finance this strategy through its loan 
value. There would be no margin interest charges, because all transactions are cred­
it transactions. (No debits are created, as long as the Martingale "limits" are not 
reached.) The securities portfolio would not have to be touched unless the strategy 
were terminated before the last set of calls expired worthless. 
This is where the danger comes in: If the stock upon which the calls are written 
rises so fast that one completely uses up all of his collateral value to finance the naked 
calls, and then one is required to roll again, the strategy could result in large losses. 
For a while, one could simply continue to roll the same number of calls up for deb­
its, but eventually those debits would mount in size if the stock persisted in rising. At 

===== PDF PAGE 168 =====
142 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
this point, even if the stock did finally decline enough for the last set of calls to expire 
worthless, the overall strategy might still have been operated at a loss. 
Example: The basic strategy in the case of rising stock is shown in Table 5-3. Note 
that each transaction is a credit and that all ( except the last) involve taking a realized 
loss. 
This example assumes that the stock rose so quickly that a longer-term call was 
never available to roll into. That is, the October calls were always utilized. If there 
were a longer-term call available (the January series, for example), the writer should 
roll up and out as well. In this way, larger credits could be generated. The number of 
calls written increased from 5 to 15 and the collateral required as backing for the 
writing of the naked calls also increased heavily. Recall that the collateral require­
ment is equal to 20% of the stock price plus the call premium, less the amount by 
which the call is out-of-the-money. The premium may be used against the collateral 
requirements. Using the stock and call prices of the example above, the investment 
is computed in Table 5-4. While the number of written calls has tripled from 5 to 15, 
the collateral requirement has more than quadrupled from $5,000 to $21,000. This is 
why the investor must have ample collateral backing to utilize this strategy. The gen­
eral philosophy of the large investors who do apply this strategy is that they hope to 
eventually make a profit and, since they are using the collateral value of large securi­
ty positions already held, they are not investing any more money. The strategy does 
not really "cost" these investors anything. All profits represent additional income and 
do not in any way disturb the underlying security portfolio. Unfortunately, losses 
taken due to aborting the strategy could seriously affect the portfolio. This is why the 
investor must have sufficient collateral to carry through to completion. 
The sophisticated strategist who implements this strategy will generally do 
more rolling than that discussed in the simple example above. First, if the stock 
drops, the calls will be rolled down to the next strike - for a credit - in order to con­
stantly be selling the most time premium, which is always found in the longest-term 
at-the-money call. Furthermore, the strategist may want to roll out to a more distant 
expiration series whenever the opportunity presents itself. This rolling out, or for­
ward, action is only taken when the stock is relatively unchanged from the initial 
price and there is no need to roll up or down. 
This strategy seems ve:ry attractive as long as one has enough collateral backing. 
Should one use up all of his available collateral, the strategy could collapse, causing 
substantial losses. It may not necessarily generate large rates of return in rising mar­
kets, but in stable or declining markets the generation of additional income can be 
quite substantial. Since the investor is not putting up any additional cash but is uti-

===== PDF PAGE 169 =====
Cl,apter 5: Naked Call Writing 
TABLE 5-3. 
Rolling for credits when stock is rising. 
Initially: XYZ = 50 
Sell 5 XYZ October 50's at 7 
later: XYZ rises to 60 
Buy 5 XYZ October 50's at 11 and 
sell 8 XYZ October 60's at 7 
Later: XYZ rises further to 70 
Buy 8 XYZ October 60's at 11 and 
sell 15 XYZ October 70's at 6 
Finally: XYZ falls and the October 70's expire worthless 
TABLE 5-4. 
Increase in collateral requirement. 
Initially: XYZ = 50 
Sell 5 XYZ October 50's at 7 
($3,500 net credit) 
Later: . XYZ = 60 
Sell 8 XYZ October 60's at 7 
Buy 5 October 50's at 11 
($3,600 net credit to date) 
Later: XYZ = 70 
Sell 15 XYZ October 70's at 6 
Buy 8 XYZ October 60' s at 1 1 
($3,800 net credit to date) 
143 
+$3,500 credit 
- 5,500 debit 
+ 5,600 credit 
- 8,800 debit 
+ 9,000 credit 
Net gain = +$3,800 
$ 5,000 collateral required 
$ 9,600 collateral required 
$21,000 collateral required 
lizing the collateral power of his present securities, his "investment" is actually zero. 
Any profits represent additional income. The investor must be aware of one other 
factor that can upset the strategy. If a stock should rise so far as to require the num­
ber of calls to exceed the position limits set by the OCC, the strategy is ruined. In the 
example above, XYZ would probably have to rise to about a price of over 200, with­
out a correction, before the sale of"' 1,000 calls would be required. If the strategist 
originally started with too many naked calls, he could potentially exceed the limit in 
a short time period. Rather than attempting to sell too many calls initially in any one 
"Position limits are higher now. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 7 | PDF PAGES 198-211 =====

===== PDF PAGE 198 =====
CHAPTER 7 
Bull Spreads 
The bull spread is one of the most popular forms of spreading. In this type of spread, 
one buys a call at a certain striking price and sells a call at a higher striking price. 
Generally, both options have the same expiration date. This is a vertical spread. A bull 
spread tends to be profitable if the underlying stock rrwves up in price; hence, it is a 
bullish position. The spread has both limited profit potential and limited risk. 
Although both can be substantial percentagewise, the risk can never exceed the net 
investment. In fact, a bull spread requires a smaller dollar investment and therefore 
has a smaller maximum dollar loss potential than does an outright call purchase of a 
similar call. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 32; 
XYZ October 30 call, 3; and 
XYZ October 35 call, 1. 
A bull spread would be established by buying the October 30 call and simultaneous­
ly selling the October 35 call. Assume that this could be done at the indicated 2-point 
debit. A call bull spread is always a debit transaction, since the call with the lower 
striking price must always trade for more than a call with a higher price, if both have 
the same expiration date. Table 7-1 and Figure 7-1 depict the results of this transac­
tion at expiration. The indicated call profits or losses would be realized if the calls 
were liquidated at parity at expiration. Note that the spread has a maximum profit 
and this profit is realized if the stock is anywhere above the higher striking price at 
expiration. The maxipmm loss is realized if the stock is anywhere below the lower 
strike at expiration, and is equal to the net investment, 2 points in this example. 
172 

===== PDF PAGE 199 =====
Chapter 7: Bull Spreads 173 
Moreover, there is a break-even point that always lies between the two striking prices 
at expiration. In this example, the break-even point is 32. All bull spreads have prof­
it graphs with the same shape as the one shown in Figure 7-1 when the expiration 
dates are the same for both calls. 
The investor who establishes this position is bullish on the underlying stock, but 
is generally looking for a way to hedge himself. If he were rampantly bullish, he 
TABLE 7-1. 
Results at expiration of bull spread. 
XYZ Price of 
Expiration 
25 
30 
32 
35 
40 
45 
FIGURE 7-1. 
Bull spread. 
c: +$300 
.Q 
~ 
-~ 
w 
October 30 
Profit 
-$ 300 
- 300 
100 
+ 200 
+ 700 
+ 1,200 
October 35 
Profit 
+$100 
+ 100 
+ 100 
+ 100 
- 400 
- 900 
,, 
,,,' 
;ff 
,,,' 
,,' 
iii 
~ 
,,,,' 
$01---------'----J...__.... _ ___. _____ _ 
30 3:?,,' 35 
0 ::: -$200 
e 0..-$300 
, , 
..------,,,,,' 
Call Purchase 
•-----------,' 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Total 
Profit 
-$200 
- 200 
0 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 

===== PDF PAGE 200 =====
174 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
would merely buy the October 30 call outright. However, the sale of the October 35 
call against the purchase of the October 30 allows him to take a position that will out­
perform the outright purchase of the October 30, dollarwise, as long as the stock does 
not rise above 36 by expiration. This fact is demonstrated by the dashed line in Figure 
7-1. 
Therefore, the strategist establishing the bull spread is bullish, but not overly so. 
To verify that this comparison is correct, note that if one bought the October 30 call 
outright for 3 points, he would have a 3-point profit at expiration if XYZ were at 36. 
Both strategies have a 3-point profit at 36 at expiration. Below 36, the bull spread 
does better because the sale of the October 35 call brings in the extra point of pre­
mium. Above 36 at expiration, the outright purchase outperforms the bull spread, 
because there is no limit on the profits that can occur in an outright purchase situa­
tion. 
The net investment required for a bull spread is the net debit plus commissions. 
Since. the spread must be transacted in a margin account, there will generally be a 
minimum equity requirement imposed by the brokerage firm. In addition, there may 
be a maintenance requirement by some brokers. Suppose that one was establishing 
10 spreads at the prices given in the example above. His investment, before com­
missions, would be $2,000 ($200 per spread), plus commissions. It is a simple matter 
to compute the break-even point and the maximum profit potential of a call bull 
spread: 
Break-even point= Lower striking price+ Net debit of spread 
Maximum profit _ Higher striking _ Lower striking _ Net debit 
potential - price price of spread 
In the example above, the net debit was 2 points. Therefore, the break-even 
point would be 30 + 2, or 32. The maximum profit potential would be 35 - 30 - 2, or 
3 points. These figures agree with Table 7-1 and Figure 7-1. Commissions may rep­
resent a significant percentage of the profit and net investment, and should therefore 
be calculated before establishing the position. If these commissions are included in 
the net debit to establish the spread, they conveniently fit into the preceding formu­
lae. Commission charges can be reduced percentagewise by spreading a larger quan­
tity of calls. For this reason, it is generally advisable to spread at least 5 options at a 
time. 

===== PDF PAGE 201 =====
Chapter 7: Bull Spreads 175 
DEGREES OF AGGRESSIVENESS 
AGGRESSIVE BULL SPREAD 
Depending on how the bull spread is constructed, it may be an extremely aggressive 
or more conservative position. The most commonly used bull spread is of the aggres­
sive type; the stock is generally well below the higher striking price when the spread 
is established. This aggressive bull spread generally has the ability to generate sub­
stantial percentage returns if the underlying stock should rise in price far enough by 
expiration. Aggressive bull spreads are most attractive when the underlying common 
stock is relatively close to the lower striking price at the time the spread is established. 
A bull spread established under these conditions will generally be a low-cost spread 
with substantial profit potential, even after commissions are included. 
EXTREMELY AGGRESSIVE BULL SPREAD 
An extremely aggressive type of bull spread is the "out-of-the-money" spread. In such 
a spread, both calls are out-of-the-money when the spread is established. These 
spreads are extremely inexpensive to establish and have large potential profits if the 
stock should climb to the higher striking price by expiration. However, they are usu­
ally quite deceptive in nature. The underlying stock has only a relatively remote 
chance of advancing such a great deal by expiration, and the spreader could realize a 
100% loss of his investment even if the underlying stock advances moderately, since 
both calls are out-of-the-money. This spread is akin to buying a deeply out-of-the­
money call as an outright speculation. It is not recommended that such a strategy be 
pursued with more than a very small percentage of one's speculative funds. 
LEAST AGGRESSIVE BULL SPREAD 
Another type of bull spread can be found occasionally - the "in-the-money" spread. 
In this situation, both calls are in-the-money. This is a much less aggressive position, 
since it offers a large probability of realizing the maximum profit potential, although 
that profit potential will be substantially smaller than the profit potentials offered by 
the more aggressive bull spreads. 
Example: XYZ is at 37 some time before expiration, and the October 30 call is at 7 
while the October 35 call is at 4. Both calls are in-the-money and the spread would 
cost 3 points (debit) to establish. The maximum profit potential is 2 points, but it 
would be realized as long as XYZ were above 35 at expiration. That is, XYZ could fall 
by 2 points and the spreader would still make his maximum profit. This is certainly a 
more conservative position than the aggressive spread described above. The com-

===== PDF PAGE 202 =====
176 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
mission costs in this spread would be substantially larger than those in the spreads 
above, which involve less expensive options initially, and they should therefore be fig­
ured into one's profit calculations before entering into the spread transaction. Since 
this stock would have to decline 7 points to fall below 30 and cause a loss of the entire 
investment, it would have to be considered a rather low-probability event. This fact 
adds to the less aggressive nature of this type of spread. 
RANKING BULL SPREADS 
To accurately compare the risk and reward potentials of the many bull spreads that 
are available in a given day, one has to use a computer to perform the mass calcula­
tions. It is possible to use a strictly arithmetic method of ranking bull spreads, but 
such a list will not be as accurate as the correct method of analysis. In reality, it is 
necessary to incorporate the volatility of the underlying stock, and possibly the 
expected return from the spread as well, into one's calculations. The concept of 
expected return is described in detail in Chapter 28, where a bull spread is used as 
an example. 
The exact method for using volatility and predicting an option's price after an 
upward movement are presented later. Many data services offer such information. 
However, if the reader wants to attempt a simpler method of analysis, the following 
one may suffice. In any ranking of bull spreads, it is important not to rank the spreads 
by their maximum potential profits at expiration. Such a ranking will always give the 
most weight to deeply out-of-the-money spreads, which can rarely achieve their max­
imum profit potential. It would be better to screen out any spreads whose maximum 
profit prices are too far away from the current stock price. A simple method of allow­
ing for a stock's movement might be to assume that the stock could, at expiration, 
advance by an amount equal to twice the time value premium in an at-the-money 
call. Since more volatile stocks have options with greater time value premium, this is 
a simple attempt to incorporate volatility into the analysis. Also, since longer-term 
options have more time value premium than do short-term options, this will allow for 
larger movements during a longer time period. Percentage returns should include 
commission costs. This simple analysis is not completely correct, but it may prove 
useful to those traders looking for a simple arithmetic method of analysis that can be 
computed quickly. 
FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
The bull spreads described in previous examples utilize the same expiration date for 
both the short call and the long call. It is sometimes useful to buy a call with a longer 

===== PDF PAGE 203 =====
Chapter 7: Bull Spreads 177 
time to maturity than the short call has. Such a position is known as a diagonal bull 
spread and is discussed in a later chapter. 
Experienced traders often tum to bull spreads when options are expensive. The 
sale of the option at the higher strike partially mitigates the cost of buying an expen­
sive option at the lower strike. However, one should not always use the bull spread 
approach just because the options have a lot of time value premium, for he would be 
giving up a lot of upside profit potential in order to have a hedged position. 
With most types of spreads, it is necessary for some time to pass for the spread 
to become significantly profitable, even if the underlying stock moves in favor of the 
spreader. For this reason, bull spreads are not for traders unless the options involved 
are very short-term in nature. If a speculator is bullishly oriented for a short-term 
upward move in an underlying stock, it is generally better for him to buy a call out­
right than to establish a bull spread. Since the spread differential changes mainly as 
a function of time, small movements in price by the underlying stock will not cause 
much of a short-term change in the price of the spread. However, the bull spread has 
a distinct advantage over the purchase of a call if the underlying stock advances mod­
erately by expiration. 
In the previous example, a bull spread was established by buying the XYZ 
October 30 call for 3 points and simultaneously selling the October 35 call for 1 point. 
This spread can be compared to the outright purchase of the XYZ October 30 alone. 
There is a short-term advantage in using the outright purchase. 
Example: The underlying stock jumps from 32 to 35 in one day's time. The October 
30 would be selling for approximately 5½ points if that happened, and the outright 
purchaser would be ahead by 2½ points, less one option commission. The long side 
of the bull spread would do as well, of course, since it utilizes the same option, but 
the short side, the October 35, would probably be selling for about 2½ points. Thus, 
the bull spread would be worth 3 points in total (5½ points on the long side, less 2½ 
points loss on the short side). This represents a 1-point profit to the spreader, less two 
option commissions, since the spread was initially established at a debit of 2 points. 
Clearly, then, for the shortest time period one day - the outright purchase outper­
forms the bull spread on a quick rise. 
For a slightly longer time period, such as 30 days, the outright purchase still has 
the advantage if the underlying stock moves up quickly. Even if the stock should 
advance above 35 in 30 days, the bull spread will still have time premium in it and 
thus will not yet have reached its maximum spread potential of 5 points. Recall that 
the maximum potential of a bull spread is always equal to the difference between the 
striking prices. Clearly, the outright purchaser will do very well if the underlying 
stock should advance that far in 30 days' time. When risk is considered, however, it 

===== PDF PAGE 204 =====
178 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
must be pointed out that the bull spread has fewer dollars at risk and, if the under­
lying stock should drop rather than rise, the bull spread will often have a smaller loss 
than the outright call purchase would. 
The longer it takes for the underlying stock to advance, the more the advantage 
swings to the spread. Suppose XYZ does not get to 35 until expiration. In this case, 
the October 30 call would be worth 5 points and the October 35 call would be worth­
less. The outright purchase of the October 30 call would make a 2-point profit less 
one commission, but the spread would now have a 3-point profit, less two commis­
sions. Even with the increased commissions, the spreader will make more of a prof­
it, both dollarwise and percentagewise. 
Many traders are disappointed with the low profits available from a bull spread 
when the stock rises almost immediately after the position is established. One way to 
partially off set the problem with the spread not widening out right away is to use a 
greater distance between the two strikes. When the distance is great, the spread has 
room to widen out, even though it won't reach its maximum profit potential right 
away. Still, since the strikes are "far apart," there is more room for the spread to 
widen even if the underlying stock rises immediately. 
The conclusion that can be drawn from these examples is that, in general, the 
outright purchase is a better strategy if one is looking for a quick rise by the under­
lying stock. Overall, the bull spread is a less aggressive strategy than the outright pur­
chase of a call. The spread will not produce as much of a profit on a short-term move, 
or on a sustained, large upward move. It will, however, outperform the outright pur­
chase of a call if the stock advances slowly and moderately by expiration. Also, the 
spread always involves fewer actual dollars of risk, because it requires a smaller debit 
to establish initially. Table 7-2 summarizes which strategy has the upper hand for var­
ious stock movements over differing time periods. 
TABLE 7-2. 
Bull spread and outright purchase compared. 
If the underlying stock ... 
Remains 
Relatively Advonces Advances 
Declines Unchanged Moderately Substantially 
in ... 
1 week Bull spread Bull spread Outright purchase Outright purchase 
1 month Bull spread Bull spread Outright purchase Outright purchase 
At expiration Bull spread Bull spread Bull spread Outright purchase 

===== PDF PAGE 205 =====
Chapter 7: Bull Spreads 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
179 
Since the strategy has both limited profit and limited risk, it is not mandatory for the 
spreader to take any follow-up action prior to expiration. If the underlying stock 
advances substantially, the spreader should watch the time value premium in the 
short call closely in order to close the spread if it appears that there is a possibility of 
assignment. This possibility would increase substantially if the time value premium 
disappeared from the short call. If the stock falls, the trader may want to close the 
spread in order to limit his losses even further. 
When the spread is closed, the order should also be entered as a spread trans­
action. If the underlying stock has moved up in price, the order to liquidate would 
be a credit spread involving two closing transactions. The maximum credit that can 
be recovered from a bull spread is an amount equal to the difference between the 
striking prices. In the previous example, if XYZ were above 35 at expiration, one 
might enter an order to liquidate the spread as follows: Buy the October 35 (it is 
common practice to specify the buy side of a spread first when placing an order); 
sell the October 30 at a 5-point credit. In reality, because of the difference between 
bids and offers, it is quite difficult to obtain the entire 5-point credit even if expira­
tion is quite near. Generally, one might ask for a 4¼ or 47/s credit. It is possible to 
close the spread via exercise, although this method is normally advisable only for 
traders who pay little or no commissions. If the short side of a spread is assigned, 
the spreader may satisfy the assignment notice by exercising the long side of his 
spread. There is no margin required to do so, but there are stock commissions 
involved. Since these stock commissions to a public customer would be substantial­
ly larger than the option commissions involved in closing the spread by liquidating 
the options, it is recommended that the public customer attempt to liquidate rather 
than exercise. 
A minor point should be made here. Since the amount of commissions paid to 
liquidate the spread would be larger if higher call prices are involved, the actual net 
maximum profit point for a bull spread is for the stock to be exactly at the higher 
striking price at expiration. If the stock exceeds the higher striking price by a great 
deal, the gross profit will be the same (it was demonstrated earlier that this gross 
profit is the same anywhere above the higher strike at expiration), but the net profit 
will be slightly smaller, since the investor will pay more in commissions to liquidate 
the spread. 
Some spreaders prefer to buy back the short call if the underlying stock drops 
in price, in order to lock in the profit on the short side. They will then hold the long 
call in hopes of a rise in price by the underlying stock, in order to make the long side 
of the spread profitable as well. This amounts to "legging" out of the spread, although 

===== PDF PAGE 206 =====
180 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
the overall increase in risk is small - the amount paid to repurchase the short call. If 
he attempts to "leg" out of the spread in such a manner, the spreader should not 
attempt to buy back the short call at too high a price. If it can be repurchased at 1/s 
or 1/16, the spreader will be giving away virtually nothing by buying back the short call. 
However, he should not be quick to repurchase it if it still has much more value than 
that, unless he is closing out the entire spread. At no time should one attempt to "leg" 
out after a stock price increase, taking the profit on the long side and hoping for a 
stock price decline to make the short side profitable as well. The risk is too great. 
Many traders find themselves in the somewhat perplexing situation of having 
seen the underlying make a large, quick move, only to find that their spread has not 
widened out much. They often try to figure out a way to perhaps lock in some gains 
in case the underlying subsequently drops in price, but they want to be able to wait 
around for the spread to widen out more toward its maximum profit potential. There 
really isn't any hedge that can accomplish all of these things. The only position that 
can lock in the profits in a call bull spread is to purchase the accompanying put bear 
spread. This strategy is discussed in Chapter 23, Spreads Combining Calls and Puts. 
OTHER USES OF BULL SPREADS 
Superficially, the bull spread is one of the simplest forms of spreading. However, it 
can be an extremely useful tool in a wide variety of situations. Two such situations 
were described in Chapter 3. If the outright purchaser of a call finds himself with an 
unrealized loss, he may be able to substantially improve his chances of getting out 
even by "rolling down" into a bull spread. If, however, he has an unrealized profit, he 
may be able to sell a call at the next higher strike, creating a bull spread, in an attempt 
to lock in some of his profit. 
In a somewhat similar manner, a common stockholder who is faced with an 
unrealized loss may be able to utilize a bull spread to lower the price at which he 
can break even. He may often have a significantly better chance of breaking even or 
making a profit by using options. The following example illustrates the stockholder's 
strategy. 
Example: An investor buys 100 shares of XYZ at 48, and later finds himself with an 
unrealized loss with the stock at 42. A 6-point rally in the stock would be necessary 
in order to break even. However, if XYZ has listed options trading, he may be able to 
significantly reduce his break-even price. The prices are: 

===== PDF PAGE 207 =====
Chapter 7: Bull Spreads 
XYZ common, 42; 
XYZ October 40, 4; and 
XYZ October 45, 2. 
181 
The stock owner could enhance his overall position by buying one October 40 call 
and selling two October 45 calls. Note that no extra money, except commissions, is 
required for this transaction, because the credit received from selling two October 
45's is $400 and is equal to the cost of buying the October 40 call. However, mainte­
nance and equity requirements still apply, because a spread has been established. 
The resulting position does not have an uncovered, or naked, option in it. One 
of the October 45 calls that was sold is covered by the underlying stock itself. The 
other is part of a bull spread with the October 40 call. It is not particularly important 
that the resulting position is a combination of both a bull spread and a covered write. 
What is important is the profit characteristic of this new total position. 
If XYZ should continue to decline in price and be below 40 at October expira­
tion, all the calls will expire worthless, and the resulting loss to the stock owner will 
be the same (except for the option commissions spent) as if he had merely held onto 
his stock without having done any option trading. 
Since both a covered write and a bull spread are strategies with limited profit 
potential, this new position obviously must have a limited profit. If XYZ is anywhere 
above 45 at October expiration, the maximum profit will be realized. To determine 
the size of the maximum profit, assume that XYZ is at exactly 45 at expiration. In that 
case, the two short October 45's would expire worthless and the long October 40 call 
would be worth 5 points. The option trades would have resulted in a $400 profit on 
the short side ($200 from each October 45 call) plus a $100 profit on the long side, 
for a total profit of $500 from the option trades. Since the stock was originally bought 
at 48 in this example, the stock portion of the position is a $300 loss with XYZ at 45 
at expiration. The overall profit of the position is thus $500 less $300, or $200. 
For stock prices between 40 and 45 at expiration, the results are shown in 
Table 7-3 and Figure 7-2. Figure 7-2 depicts the two columns from the table labeled 
"Profit on Stock" and "Total Profit," so that one can visualize how the new total posi­
tion compares with the original stockholder's profit. Several points should be noted 
from either the graph or the table. First, the break-even point is lowered from 48 to 
44. The new total position breaks even at 44, so that only a 2-point rally by the stock 
by expiration is necessary in order to break even. The two strategies are equal at 50 
at expiration. That is, the stock would have to rally more than 8 points, from 42 to 
50, by expiration for the original stockholder's position to outperform the new posi-

===== PDF PAGE 208 =====
182 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
TABLE 7-3. 
Lowering the break-even price on common stock. 
XYZ Price at Profit on Profit on Short Profit on long Total 
Expiration Stock October 45's October 40 Profit 
35 -$1,300 +$400 -$400 -$1,300 
38 - 1,000 + 400 - 400 - 1,000 
40 800 + 400 - 400 800 
42 600 + 400 - 200 400 
43 500 + 400 - 100 200 
44 400 + 400 0 0 
45 300 + 400 + 100 + 200 
48 0 - 200 + 400 + 200 
50 + 200 - 600 + 600 + 200 
tion. Below 40, the two strategies produce the same result. Finally, between 40 and 
50, the new position outperforms the original stockholder's position. 
In summary, then, the stockholder stands to gain much and gives away very lit­
tle by adding the indicated options to his stock position. If the stock stabilizes at all -
anywhere between 40 and 50 in the example above - the new position would be an 
improvement. Moreover, the investor can break even or make profits on a small rally. 
If the stock continues to drop heavily, nothing additional will be lost except for option 
commissions. Only if the stock rallies very sharply will the stock position outperform 
the total position. 
This strategy- combining a covered write and a bull spread - is sometimes used 
as an initial ( opening) trade as well. That is, an investor who is considering buying 
XYZ at 42 might decide to buy the October 40 and sell two October 45's (for even 
money) at the outset. The resulting position would not be inferior to the outright pur­
chase of XYZ stock, in terms of profit potential, unless XYZ rose above 46 by October 
expiration. 
Bull spreads may also be used as a "substitute" for covered writing. Recall from 
Chapter 2 that writing against warrants can be useful because of the smaller invest­
ment required, especially if the warrant was in-the-money and was not selling at 
much of a premium. The same thinking applies to call options. If there is an in-the­
money call with little or no time premium remaining in it, its purchase may be used 
as a substitute for buying the stock itself Of course, the call will expire, whereas the 
stock will not; but the profit potential of owning a deeply in-the-money call can be 

===== PDF PAGE 209 =====
Chapter 7: Bull Spreads 
FIGURE 7-2. 
Lowering the break-even price on common stock. 
C: 
0 
I +$200 
iii 
(/) 
$0 (/) 
.:l 
0 
i5 
e 
Q. 
-$800 
40 
Profit with Options 
, 
,,,' , , 
,,,' 
50 
Stock Price at Expiration 
183 
;f ,, 
very similar to owning the stock. Since such a call costs less to purchase than the stock 
itself would, the buyer is getting essentially the same profit or loss potential with a 
smaller investment. It is natural, then, to think that one might write another call -
one closer to the money- against the deeply in-the-money purchased call. This posi­
tion would have profit characteristics much like a covered write, since the long call 
"simulates" the purchase of stock This position really is, of course, a bull spread, in 
which the purchased call is well in-the-money and the written call is closer to the 
money. Clearly, one would not want to put all of his money into such a strategy and 
forsake covered writing, since, with bull spreads, he could be entirely wiped out in a 
moderate market decline. In a covered writing strategy, one still owns the stocks even 
after a severe market decline. However, one may achieve something of a compromise 
by investing a much smaller amount of money in bull spreads than he might have 
invested in covered writes. He can still retain the same profit potential. The balance 
of the investor's funds could then be placed in interest-bearing securities. 

===== PDF PAGE 210 =====
184 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 49; 
XYZ April 50 call, 3; and 
XYZ April 35 call, 14. 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Since the deeply in-the-money call has no time premium, its purchase will perform 
much like the purchase of the stock until April expiration. Table 7-4 summarizes the 
profit potential from the covered write or the bull spread. The profit potentials are 
the same from a cash covered write or the bull spread. Both would yield a $400 prof­
it before commissions if XYZ were above 50 at April expiration. However, since the 
bull spread requires a much smaller investment, the spreader could put $3,500 into 
interest-bearing securities. This interest could be considered the equivalent of 
receiving the dividends on the stock. In any case, the spreader can lose only $1,100, 
even if the stock declines substantially. The covered writer could have a larger unre­
alized loss than that if XYZ were below 35 at expiration. Also, in the bull spread sit­
uation, the writer can "roll down" the April 50 call if the stock declines in price, just 
as he might do in a covered writing situation. 
TABLE 7-4. 
Results for covered write and bull spread compared. 
Maximum profit potential 
(stock over 50 in April) 
Break-even point 
Investment 
Covered Write: 
Buy XYZ and Sell 
April 50 Coll 
$ 400 
46 
$4,600 
Bull Spread: 
Buy XYZ April 35 Call and 
Sell April 50 Coll 
$ 400 
46 
$1,100 
Thus, the bull spread offers the same dollar rewards, the same break-even 
point, smaller commission costs, less potential risk, and interest income from the 
fixed-income portion of the investment. While it is not always possible to find a 
deeply in-the-money call to use as a "substitute" for buying the stock, when one does 
exist, the strategist should consider using the bull spread instead of the covered write. 

===== PDF PAGE 211 =====
Chapter 7: Bull Spreads 
SUMMARY 
185 
The bull spread is one of the simplest and most popular forms of spreading. It will 
generally perform best in a moderately bullish environment. A bull spread will not 
widen out to its maximum profit potential right away, though; so for short-term 
trades, the outright purchase of a call is a better choice. The bull spread can also be 
applied for more sophisticated purposes in a far wider range of situations than mere­
ly wanting to attempt to capitalize on a moderate advance by the underlying stock. 
Both call buyers and stock buyers may be able to use bull spreads to "roll down" and 
produce lower break-even points for their positions. The covered writer may also be 
able to use bull spreads as a substitute for covered writes in certain situations in 
which a deeply in-the-money call exists. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 9 | PDF PAGES 219-225 =====

===== PDF PAGE 219 =====
Chapter 9: Calendar Spreads 
FIGURE 9-1. 
Calendar spread at near-term expiration. 
C: 
i +$200 
$ 
1i:i 
~ 
0 
~ o. -$300 
Stock Price at Expiration 
TABLE 9-1. 
Estimated profit or losses at April expiration. 
XYZ Stock April 50 April 50 July 50 
Price Price Profit Price 
40 0 +$500 1/2 
45 0 + 500 21/2 
48 0 + 500 4 
50 0 + 500 5 
52 2 + 300 6 
55 5 0 8 
60 10 - 500 l 01/2 
193 
July 50 Total 
Profit Profit 
-$750 -$250 
- 550 - 50 
- 400 + 100 
- 300 + 200 
- 200 + 100 
0 0 
+ 250 - 250 
of the remaining long call at expiration, as well as a function of the time remaining to 
near-term expiration. 
Table 9-1 and Figure 9-1 clearly depict several of the more significant aspects 
of the calendar spread. There is a range within which the spread is profitable at near­
term expiration. That range would appear to be about 46 to 55 in the example. 
Outside that range, losses can occur, but they are limited to the amount of the initial 
debit. Notice in the example that the stock would have to be well below 40 or well 

===== PDF PAGE 220 =====
194 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
above 60 for the maximum loss to occur. Even if the stock is at 40 or 60, there is some 
time premium left in the longer-term option, and the loss is not quite as large as the 
maximum possible loss of $300. 
This type of calendar spread has limited profits and relatively large commission 
costs. It is generally best to establish such a spread 8 to 12 weeks before the near­
term option expires. If this is done, one is capitalizing on the maximum rate of decay 
of the near-term option with respect to the longer-term option. That is, when a call 
has less than 8 weeks of life, the rate of decay of its time value premium increases 
substantially with respect to the longer-term options on the same stock. 
THE EFFECT OF VOLATILITY 
The implied volatility of the options (and hence the actual volatility of the underly­
ing stock) will have an effect on the calendar spread. As volatility increases, the 
spread widens; as volatility contracts, the spread shrinks. This is important to know. 
In effect, buying a calendar spread is an antivolatility strategy: One wants the under­
lying to remain somewhat unchanged. Sometimes, calendar spreads look especially 
attractive when the underlying stock is volatile. However, this can be misleading for 
two reasons. First of all, since the stock is volatile, there is a greater chance that it will 
move outside of the profit area. Second, if the stock does stabilize and trades in a 
range near the striking price, the spread will lose value because of the decrease in 
volatility. That loss may be greater than the gain from time decay! 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
Ideally, the spreader would like to have the stock be just below the striking price 
when the near-term call expires. If this happens, he can close the spread with only 
one commission cost, that of selling out the long call. If the calls are in-the-money at 
the expiration date, he will, of course, have to pay two commissions to close the 
spread. As with all spread positions, the order to close the spread should be placed 
as a single order. "Legging" out of a spread is highly risky and is not recommended. 
Prior to expiration, the spreader should close the spread if the near-term short 
call is trading at parity. He does this to avoid assignment. Being called out of spread 
position is devastating from the viewpoint of the stock commissions involved for the 
public customer. The near-term call would not normally be trading at parity until 
quite close to the last day of trading, unless the stock has undergone a substantial rise 
in price. 
In the case of an early downside breakout by the underlying stock, the spread­
er has several choices. He could immediately close the spread and take a small loss 

===== PDF PAGE 221 =====
Chapter 9: Calendar Spreads 195 
on the position. Another choice is to leave the spread alone until the near-term call 
expires and then to hope for a partial recovery from the stock in order to be able to 
recover some value from the long side of the spread. Such a holding action is often 
better than the immediate close-out, because the expense of buying back the short 
call can be quite large percentagewise. A riskier downside defensive action is to sell 
out the long call if the stock begins to break down heavily. In this way, the spreader 
recovers something from the long side of his spread immediately, and then looks for 
the stock to remain depressed so that the short side of the spread will expire worth­
less. This action requires that one have enough collateral available to margin the 
resulting naked call, often an amount substantially in excess of the original debit paid 
for the spread. Moreover, if the underlying stock should reverse direction and rally 
back to or above the striking price, the short side of the spread is naked and could 
produce substantial losses. The risk assumed by such a follow-up violates the initial 
neutral premise of the spread, and should therefore be avoided. Of these three types 
of downside defensive action, the easiest and rrwst conservative one is to do nothing 
at all, letting the short call expire worthless and then hoping for a recovery by the 
underlying stock. If this tack is taken, the risk remains fixed at the original debit paid 
for the spread, and occasionally a rally may produce large profits on the long call. 
Although this rally is a nonfrequent event, it generally costs the spreader very little 
to allow himself the opportunity to take advantage of such a rally if it should occur. 
In fact, the strategist can employ a slight modification of this sort of action, even 
if the spread is not at a large loss. If the underlying stock is moderately below the 
striking price at near-term expiration, the short option will expire worthless and the 
spreader will be left holding the long option. He could sell the long side immediate­
ly and perhaps take a small gain or loss. However, it is often a reasonable strategy to 
sell out a portion of the long side - recovering all or a substantial portion of the ini­
tial investment - and hold the remainder. If the stock rises, the remaining long posi­
tion may appreciate substantially. Although this sort of action deviates from the true 
nature of the time spread, it is not overly risky. 
An early breakout to the upside by the underlying stock is generally handled in 
much the same way as a downside breakout. Doing nothing is often the best course 
of action. If the underlying stock rallies shortly after the spread is established, the 
spread will shrink by a small amount, but not substantially, because both options will 
hold premium in a rally. If the spreader were to rush in to close the position, he 
would be paying commissions on two rather expensive options. He will usually do 
better to wait and give himself as much of a chance for a reversal as possible. In fact, 
even at near-term expiration, there will normally be some time premium left in the 
long option so that the maximum loss would not have to be realized. A highly risk­
oriented upside defensive action is to cover the short call on a technical breakout and 

===== PDF PAGE 222 =====
196 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
continue to hold the long call. This can become disastrous if the breakout fails and 
the stock drops, possibly resulting in losses far in excess of the original debit. 
Therefore, this action cannot be considered anything but extremely aggressive and 
illogical for the neutral strategist. 
If a breakout does not occur, the spreader will normally be making unrealized 
profits as time passes. Should this be the case, he may want to set some mental stop­
out points for himself. For example, if the underlying stock is quite close to the strik­
ing price with only two weeks to go, there will be some more profit potential left in 
the spread, but the spreader should be ready to close the position quickly if the stock 
begins to get too far away from the striking price. In this manner, he can leave room 
for more profits to accrue, but he is also attempting to protect the profits that have 
already built up. This is somewhat similar to the action that the ratio writer takes 
when he narrows the range of his action points as more and more time passes. 
THE BULLISH CALENDAR SPREAD 
A less neutral and more bullish type of calendar spread is preferred by the more 
aggressive investor. In a bullish calendar spread, one sells the near-term call and buys 
a longer-term call, but he does this when the underlying stock is some distance below 
the striking price of the calls. This type of position has the attractive features of low 
dollar investment and large potential profits. Of course, there is risk involved as well. 
Example: One might set up a bullish calendar spread in the following manner: 
XYZ common, 45; 
sell the XYZ April 50 for l; and 
buy the XYZ July 50 for 1 ½. 
This investor ideally wants two things to happen. First, he would like the near­
term call to expire worthless. That is why the bullish calendar spread is established 
with out-of-the-money calls: to increase the chances of the short call expiring worth­
less. If this happens, the investor will then own the longer-term call at a net cost of 
his original debit. In this example, his original debit was only ½ of a point to create 
the spread. If the April 50 call expires worthless, the investor will own the July 50 call 
at a net cost of ½ point, plus commissions. 
The investor now needs a second criterion to be fulfilled: The stock must rise in 
price by the time the July 50 call expires. In this example, even if XYZ were to rally 
to only 52 between April and July, the July 50 call could be sold for at least 2 points. 
This represents a substantial percentage gain, because the cost of the call has been 

===== PDF PAGE 223 =====
Chapter 9: Calendar Spreads 197 
reduced to ¼ point. Thus, there is the potential for large profits in bullish calendar 
spreads if the underlying stock rallies above the striking price before the longer-term 
call expires, provided that the short-term call has already expired worthless. 
What chance does the investor have that both ideal conditions will occur? There 
is a reasonably good chance that the written call will expire worthless, since it is a 
short-term call and the stock is below the striking price to start with. If the stock falls, 
or even rises a little - up to, but not above, the striking price the first condition will 
have been met. It is the second condition, a rally above the striking price by the 
underlying stock before the longer-term expiration date, that normally presents the 
biggest problem. The chances of this happening are usually small, but the rewards 
can be large when it does happen. Thus, this strategy offers a small probability of 
making a large profit. In fact, one large profit can easily offset several losses, because 
the losses are small, dollarwise. Even if the stock remains depressed and the July 50 
call in the example expires worthless, the loss is limited to the initial debit of¼ point. 
Of course, this loss represents 100% of the initial investment, so one cannot put all 
his money into bullish calendar spreads. 
This strategy is a reasonable way to speculate, provided that the spreader 
adheres to the following criteria when establishing the spread: 
1. Select underlying stocks that are volatile enough to move above the striking price 
within the allotted time. Bullish calendar spreads may appear to be very "cheap" 
on nonvolatile stocks that are well below the striking price. But if a large stock 
move, say 20%, is required in only a few months, the spread is not worthwhile for 
a nonvolatile stock. 
2. Do not use options more than one striking price above the current market. For 
example, if XYZ were 26, use the 30 strike, not the 35 strike, since the chances 
of a rally to 30 are many times greater than the chances of a rally to 35. 
3. Do not invest a large percentage of available trading capital in bullish calendar 
spreads. Since these are such low-cost spreads, one should be able to follow this 
rule easily and still diversify into several positions. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
If the underlying stock should rally before the near-term call expires, the bullish cal­
endar spreader must never consider "legging" out of the spread, or consider cover­
ing the short call at a loss and attempting to ride the long call. Either action could 
turn the initial small, limited loss into a disastrous loss. Since the strategy hinges on 

===== PDF PAGE 224 =====
198 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
the fact that all the losses will be small and the infrequent large profits will be able 
to overcome these small losses, one should do nothing to jeopardize the strategy and 
possibly generate a large loss. 
The only reasonable sort of follow-up action that the bullish calendar spreader 
can take in advance of expiration is to close the spread if the underlying stock has 
moved up in price and the spread has widened to become profitable. This might 
occur if the stock moves up to the striking price after some time has passed. In the 
example above, if XYZ moved up to 50 with a month or so of life left in the April 50 
call, the call might be selling for I½ while the July 50 call might be selling for 3 
points. Thus, the spread could be closed at I½ points, representing a I-point gain 
over the initial debit of 1/2 point. Two commissions would have to be paid to close 
the spread, of course, but there would still be a net profit in the spread. 
USING ALL THREE EXPIRATION SERIES 
In either the neutral calendar spread or the bullish calendar spread, the investor has 
three choices of which months to use. He could sell the nearest-term call and buy the 
intermediate-term call. This is usually the most common way to set up these spreads. 
However, there is no rule that prevents him from selling the intermediate-term and 
buying the longest-term, or possibly selling the near-term and buying the long-term. 
Any of these situations would still be calendar spreads. 
Some proponents of calendar spreads prefer initially to sell the near-term and 
buy the long-term call. Then, if the near-term call expires worthless, they have an 
opportunity to sell the intermediate-term call if they so desire. 
Example: An investor establishes a calendar spread by selling the April 50 call and 
buying the October 50 call. The April call would have less than 3 months remaining 
and the October call would be the long-term call. At April expiration, if XYZ is below 
50, the April call will expire worthless. At that time, the July 50 call could be sold 
against the October 50 that is held long, thereby creating another calendar spread 
with no additional commission cost on the long side. 
The advantage of this type of strategy is that it is possible for the two sales (April 
50 and July 50 in this example) to actually bring in more credits than were spent for 
the one purchase (October 50). Thus, the spreader might be able to create a position 
in which he has a guaranteed profit. That is, if the sum of his transactions is actually 
a credit, he cannot lose money in the spread (provided that he does not attempt to 
"leg" out of the spread). The disadvantage of using the long-term call in the calendar 
spread is that the initial debit is larger, and therefore more dollars are initially at risk. 

===== PDF PAGE 225 =====
Chapter 9: Calendar Spreads 199 
If the underlying stock moves substantially up or down in the first 3 months, the 
spreader could realize a larger dollar loss with the October/ April spread because his 
loss will approach the initial debit. 
The remaining combination of the expiration series is to initially buy the 
longest-term call and sell the intermediate-term call against it. This combination will 
generally require the smallest initial debit, but there is not much profit potential in 
the spread until the intermediate-term expiration date draws near. Thus, there is a 
lot of time for the underlying stock to move some distance away from the initial strik­
ing price. For this reason, this is generally an inferior approach to calendar spread­
ing. 
SUMMARY 
Calendar spreading is a low-dollar-cost strategy that is a nonaggressive approach, pro­
vided that the spreader does not invest a large percentage of his trading capital in the 
strategy, and provided that he does not attempt to "leg" into or out of the spreads. 
The neutral calendar spread is one in which the strategist is mainly selling time; he 
is attempting to capitalize on the known fact that the near-term call will lose time pre­
mium more rapidly than will a longer-term call. A more aggressive approach is the 
bullish calendar spread, in which the speculator is essentially trying to reduce the net 
cost of a longer-term call by the amount of credits taken in from the sale of a nearer­
term call. This bullish strategy requires that the near-term call expire worthless and 
then that the underlying stock rise in price. In either strategy, the most common 
approach is to sell the nearest-term call and buy the intermediate-term call. 
However, it may sometimes prove advantageous to sell the near-term and buy the 
longest-term initially, with the intention of letting the near-term expire and then pos­
sibly writing against the longer-term call a second time. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 10 | PDF PAGES 226-244 =====

===== PDF PAGE 226 =====
. CHAPTER 10 
The Butterfly Spread 
The recipient of one of the more exotic names given to spread positions, the butter­
fly spread is a neutral position that is a combination of both a bull spread and a bear 
spread. This spread is for the neutral strategist, one who thinks the underlying stock 
will not experience much of a net rise or decline by expiration. It generally requires 
only a small investment and has limited risk. Although profits are limited as well, they 
are larger than the potential risk. For this reason, the butterfly spread is a viable strat­
egy. However, it is costly in terms of commissions. In this chapter, the strategy is 
explained using only calls. The strategy can also be implemented using a combination 
of puts and calls, or with puts only, as will be demonstrated later. 
There are three striking prices involved in a butterfiy spread. Using only calls, 
the butterfly spread consists of buying one call at the lowest striking price, selling two 
calls at the middle striking price, and buying one call at the highest striking price. The 
following example will demonstrate how the butterfly spread works. 
Example: A butterfly spread is established by buying a July 50 call for 12, selling 2 
July 60 calls for 6 each, and buying a July 70 call for 3. The spread requires a rela­
tively low debit of $300 (Table 10-1), although there are four option commissions 
involved and these may represent a substantial percentage of the net investment. As 
usual, the maximum amount of profit is realized at the striking price of the written 
calls. With most types of spreads, this is a useful fact to remember, for it can aid in 
quick computation of the potential of the spread. In this example, if the stock were 
at the striking price of the written options at expiration (60), the two July 60's that are 
short would expire worthless for a $1,200 gain. The long July 70 call would expire 
worthless for a $300 loss, and the long July 50 call would be worth 10 points, for a 
$200 loss on that call. The sum of the gains and losses would thus be a $700 gain, less 
commissions. This is the maximum profit potential of the spread. 
200 

===== PDF PAGE 227 =====
Chapter 10: The Butterfly Spread 
TABLE 10-1. 
Butterfly spread example. 
Current prices: 
XYZ common: 
XYZ July 50 call: 
XYZ July 60 call: 
XYZ July 70 call: 
Butterfly spread: 
Buy 1 July 50 call 
Sell 2 July 60 calls 
Buy 1 July 70 call 
Net debit 
60 
12 
6 
3 
$1 ,200 debit 
$1,200 credit 
$300 debit 
$300 (plus commissions) 
201 
The risk is limited in a butterfly spread, both to the upside and to the downside, 
and is equal to the amount of the net debit required to establish the spread. In the 
example above, the risk is limited to $300 plus commissions. 
Table 10-2 and Figure 10-1 depict the results of this butterfly spread at various 
prices at expiration. The profit graph resembles that of a ratio write, except that the 
loss is limited on both the upside and the downside. There is a profit range within 
which the butterfly spread makes money - 53 to 67 in the example, before commis­
sions are included. Outside this profit range, losses will occur at expiration, but these 
losses are limited to the amount of the original debit plus commissions. 
In accordance with more lenient margin requirements passed in 2000, the 
investment required for a butterfly spread is equal to the net debit expended, which 
is the risk in the spread. When the options expire in the same month and the strik­
ing prices are evenly spaced (the spacing is 10 points in this example), the following 
formulae can be used to quickly compute the important details of the butterfly 
spread: 
Net investment= Net debit of the spread 
Maximum profit = Distance between strikes - Net debit 
Downside break-even= Lowest strike+ Net debit 
Upside break-even= Highest strike - Net debit 
In the example, the distance between strikes is 10 points, the net debit is 3 
points (before commissions), the lowest strike used is 50, and the highest strike is 70. 
These formulae would then yield the following results for this example spread. 

===== PDF PAGE 228 =====
202 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Net investment= 3 points= $300 
Maximum profit =10-3 = $700 
Downside break-even= 50 + 3 = 53 
FIGURE 10-1. 
Butterfly spread. 
+$700 
Upside break-even = 70 - 3 = 67 
$0 ___ .....__ _____ _._ __ --' __ _,_ ____ _ 
70 
0 
:E -$300----
J: 
Stock Price at Expiration 
TABLE 10-2. 
Results of butterfly spread at expiration. 
XYZ Price at July 50 July 60 July 70 
Expiration Profit Profit Profit 
40 -$1,200 +$1,200 -$300 
50 - 1,200 + 1,200 - 300 
53 900 + 1,200 - 300 
56 600 + 1,200 - 300 
60 200 + 1,200 - 300 
64 + 200 + 400 - 300 
67 + 500 200 - 300 
70 + 800 800 - 300 
80 + 1,800 - 2,800 + 700 
Total 
Profit 
-$300 
- 300 
0 
+ 300 
+ 700 
+ 300 
0 
- 300 
- 300 

===== PDF PAGE 229 =====
Chapter 10: The Butterfly Spread 203 
Note that all of these answers agree with the results that were previously obtained by 
analyzing the example spread in detail. 
In this example, the maximum profit potential is $700, the maximum risk is 
$300, and the investment required is also $300, commissions excluded. In percent­
age terms, this means that the butterfly spread has a loss limited to about 100% of 
capital invested and could make profits of nearly 133% in this case. These represent 
an attractive risk/reward relationship. This is, however, just an example, and two fac­
tors that exist in the actual marketplace may greatly affect these numbers. First, com­
missions are large; it is possible that eight commissions might have to be paid to 
establish and liquidate the spread. Second, depending on the level of premiums to 
be found in the market at any point in time, it may not be possible to establish a 
spread for a debit as low as 3 points when the strikes are 10 points apart. 
SELECTING THE SPREAD 
Ideally, one would want to establish a butterfly spread at as small of a debit as pos­
sible in order to limit his risk to a small amount, although that risk is still equal to 
100% of the dollars invested in the spread. One would also like to have the stock be 
near the middle striking price to begin with, because he will then be in his maximum 
profit area if the stock remains relatively unchanged. Unfortunately, it is difficult to 
satisfy both conditions simultaneously. 
The smallest-debit butterfly spreads are those in which the stock is some dis­
tance away from the middle striking price. To see this, note that if the stock were 
well above the middle strike and all the options were at parity, the net debit would 
be zero. Although no one would attempt to establish a butterfly spread with parity 
options because of the risk of early assignment, it may be somewhat useful to try to 
obtain a small debit by taking an opinion on the underlying stock. For example, if 
the stock is close to the higher striking price, the debit would be small normally, but 
the investor would have to be somewhat bearish on the underlying stock in order to 
maximize his profit; that is, the stock would have to decline in price from the upper 
striking price to the middle striking price for the maximum profit to be realized. An 
analogous situation exists when the underlying stock is originally close to the lower 
striking price. The investor could establish the spread for a small debit in this case 
also, but he would now have to be somewhat bullish on the underlying stock in order 
to attempt to realize his maximum profit. 
Example: XYZ is at 70. One may be able to establish a low-debit butterfly spread 
with the 50's, 60's, and 70's if the following prices exist: 

===== PDF PAGE 230 =====
204 
XYZ common, 70; 
XYZ July 50, 20; 
XYZ July 60, 12; and 
XYZ July 70, 5. 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
The butterfly spread would require a debit of only $100 plus commissions to estab­
lish, because the cost of the calls at the higher and lower strike is 25 points, and a 24-
point credit would be obtained by selling two calls at the middle strike. This is indeed 
a low-cost butterfly spread, but the stock will have to move down in price for much 
of a profit to be realized. The maximum profit of $900 less commissions would be 
realized at 60 at expiration. The strategist would have to be bearish on XYZ to want 
to establish such a spread. 
Without the aid of an example, the reader should be able to determine that if 
XYZ were originally at 50, a low-cost butterfly spread could be established by buying 
the 50, selling two 60's, and buying a 70. In this case, however, the investor would 
have to be bullish on the stock, because he would want it to move up to 60 by expi­
ration in order for the maximum profit to be realized. 
In general, then, if the butterfly spread is to be established at an extremely low 
debit, the spreader will have to make a decision as to whether he wants to be bullish 
or bearish on the underlying stock. Many strategists prefer to remain as neutral as 
possible on the underlying stock at all times in any strategy. This philosophy would 
lead to slightly higher debits, such as the $300 debit in the example at the beginning 
of this chapter, but would theoretically have a better chance of making money 
because there would be a profit if the stock remained relatively unchanged, the most 
probable occurrence. 
In either philosophy, there are other considerations for the butterfly spread. 
The best butterfly spreads are generally found on the more expensive and/or more 
volatile stocks that have striking prices spaced 10 or 20 points apart. In these situa­
tions, the maximum profit is large enough to overcome the weight of the commission 
costs involved in the butterfly spread. When one establishes butterfly spreads on 
lower-priced stocks whose striking prices are only 5 points apart, he is normally put­
ting himself at a disadvantage unless the debit is extremely small. One exception to 
this rule is that attractive situations are often found on higher-priced stocks with 
striking prices 5 points apart (50, 55, and 60, for example). They do exist from time 
to time. 
In analyzing butterfly spreads, one commonly works with closing prices. It was 
mentioned earlier that using closing prices for analysis can prove somewhat mislead­
ing, since the actual execution will have to be done at bid and asked prices, and these 

===== PDF PAGE 231 =====
Chapter 10: The Butterfly Spread 205 
may differ somewhat from closing prices. Normally, this difference is small, but since 
there are three different calls involved in a butterfly spread, the difference could be 
substantial. Therefore, it is usually necessary to check the appropriate bid and asked 
price for each call before entering the spread, in order to be able to place a reason­
able debit on the order. As with other types of spreads, the butterfly spread order can 
be placed as one order. 
Before moving on to discuss follow-up action, it may be worthwhile to describe 
a tactic for stocks with 5 points between striking prices. For example, the butterfly 
spreader might work with strikes of 45, 50, and 60. If he sets up the usual type of but­
terfly spread, he would end up with a position that has too much risk near 60 and very 
little or none at all near 45. If this is what he wants, fine; but if he wants to remain 
neutral, the standard type of butterfly spread will have to be modified slightly. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
July 45 call, 7; 
July 50 call, 5; and 
July 60 call, 2. 
The normal type of butterfly spread- buying one 45, selling two 50's, and buying one 
60 - can actually be done for a credit of 1 point. However, the profitability is no 
longer symmetric about the middle striking price. In this example, the investor can­
not lose to the downside because, even if the stock collapses and all the calls expire 
worthless, he will still make his I-point credit. However, to the upside, there is risk: 
If XYZ is anywhere above 60 at expiration, the risk is 4 points. This is no longer a neu­
tral position. The fact that the lower strike is only 5 points from the middle strike 
while the higher strike is 10 points away has made this a somewhat bearish position. 
If the spreader wants to be neutral and still use these striking prices, he will have to 
put on two bull spreads and only one bear spread. That is, he should: 
Buy 2 July 45's: 
Sell 3 July 50's: 
Buy 1 July 60: 
$1,400 debit 
$1,500 credit 
$200 debit 
This position now has a net debit of $100 but has a better balance of risk at either 
end. If XYZ drops and is below 45 at expiration, the spreader will lose his $100 ini­
tial debit. But now, if XYZ is at or above 60 at expiration, he will lose $100 in that 
range also. Thus, by establishing two bull spreads with a 5-point difference between 

===== PDF PAGE 232 =====
206 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
strikes versus one bear spread with a IO-point difference between strikes, the risk has 
been balanced at both ends. When one uses strike prices that are not evenly spaced 
apart, his margin requirement increases substantially. In such a case, one has to mar­
gin the individual component spreads separately. Therefore, in this example, he 
would have to pay for the two bull spreads ( $200 each, for a total of $400) and then 
margin the additional call bear spread ($700: the $1,000 difference in the strikes, less 
the $300 credit taken in for that portion of the spread). Hence, in this example, the 
margin requirement would be $1,100, even though the risk is only $100. Technically, 
of that $1,100 requirement, the spread trader pays out only $100 in cash (the actual 
debit of the spread), and the rest of the requirement can be satisfied with excess 
equity in his account. 
The same analysis obviously applies whenever 5-point striking price intervals 
exist. There are numerous combinations that could be worked out for lower-priced 
stocks by merely skipping over a striking price ( using the 25's, 30's, and 40's, for exam­
ple). Although there are not normally many stocks trading over $100 per share, the 
same analysis is applicable using 130's, 140's, and 160's, for example. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
Since the butterfly spread has limited risk by its construction, there is usually little 
that the spreader has to do in the way of follow-up action other than avoiding early 
exercise or possibly dosing out the position early to take profits or limit losses even 
further. The only part of the spread that is subject to assignment is the call at the mid­
dle strike. If this call trades at or near parity, in-the-money, the spread should be 
closed. This may happen before expiration if the underlying stock is about to go ex­
dividend. It should be noted that accepting assignment will not increase the risk of 
the spread (because any short calls assigned would still be protected by the remain­
ing long calls). However, the margin requirement would change substantially, since 
one would now have a synthetic put (long calls, short stock) in place. Plus, there may 
be more onerous commissions for trading stock. Therefore, it is usually wise to avoid 
assignment in a butterfly spread, or in any spread, for that matter. 
If the stock is near the middle strike after a reasonable amount of time has 
passed, an unrealized profit will begin to accrue to the spreader. If one feels that the 
underlying stock is about to move away from the middle striking price and thereby 
jeopardize these profits, it may be advantageous to close the spread to take the avail­
able profit. Be certain to include commission costs when determining if an unreal­
ized profit exists. As a general rule of thumb, if one is doing 10 spreads at a time, he 

===== PDF PAGE 233 =====
Chapter 10: Tire Butterfly Spread 207 
can estimate that the commission cost for each option is about 1/s point. That is, if one 
has 10 butterfly spreads and the spread is currently at 6 points, he could figure that 
he would net about 5½ points after commissions to close the spread. This 1/s estimate 
is only valid if the spreader has at least 10 options at each strike involved in a spread. 
Normally, one would not close the spread early to limit losses, since these loss­
es are limited to the original net debit in any case. However, if the original debit was 
large and the stock is beginning to break out above the higher strike or to break down 
below the lower strike, the spreader may want to close the spread to limit losses even 
further. 
It has been repeatedly stated that one should not attempt to ''leg" out of a 
spread because of the risk that is incurred if one is wrong. However, there is a 
method of legging out of a butterfly spread that is acceptable and may even be pru­
dent. Since the spread consists of both a bull spread and a bear spread, it may often 
be the case that the stock experiences a relatively substantial move in one direction 
or the other during the life of the butterfly spread, and that the bull spread portion 
or the bear spread portion could be closed out near their maximum profit potentials. 
If this situation arises, the spreader may want to take advantage of it in order to be 
able to profit more if the underlying stock reverses direction and comes back into the 
profit range. 
Exampk: This strategy can be explained by using the initial example from this chap­
ter and then assuming that the stock falls from 60 to 45. Recall that this spread was 
initially established with a 3-point debit and a maximum profit potential of 7 points. 
The profit range was 53 to 67 at July expiration. However, a rather unpleasant situa­
tion has occurred: The stock has fallen quickly and is below the profit range. If the 
spreader does nothing and keeps the spread on, he will lose 3 points at most if the 
stock remains below 50 until July expiration. However, by increasing his risk slightly, 
he may be able to improve his position. Notice in Table 10-3 that the bear spread por­
tion of the overall spread - short July 60, long July 70 - has very nearly reached its 
maximum potential. The bear spread could be bought back for ½ point total (pay 1 
point to buy back the July 60 and receive½ point from selling out the July 70). Thus, 
the spreader could convert the butterfly spread to a bull spread by spending ½ point. 
What would such an action do to his overall position? First, his risk would be 
increased by the ½ point spent to close the bear spread. That is, if XYZ continues to 
remain below 50 until July expiration, he would now lose 3½ rather than 3 points, 
plus commissions in either case. He has, however, potentially helped his chances of 
realizing something close to the maximum profit available from the original butterfly 
spread. 

===== PDF PAGE 234 =====
208 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
TABLE 10-3. 
Initial spread and current prices. 
Initial Spread Current Prices 
XYZ common: 60 XYZ common: 45 
July 50 call: 12 July 50 call: 2 
July 60 call: 6 July 60 call: 1 
July 70 call: 3 July 70 call: 1/2 
After buying back the bear spread, he is left with the following bull spread: 
Long July 50 call _ N t d b·t 3u, . t 
h l all e e 1 ,2 pom s S ort Ju y 60 c 
He has a bull spread at the total cost paid to date - 3½ points. From the earlier dis­
cussion of bull spreads, the reader should know that the break-even point for this 
position is 53½ at expiration, and it could make a 6½ point profit if XYZ is anywhere 
over 60 at July expiration. Hence, the break-even point for the position was raised 
from 53 to 53½ by the expense of the ½ point to buy back the bear spread. However, 
if the stock should rally back above 60, the strategist will be making a profit nearly 
equal to the original maximum profit that he was aiming for (7 points). Moreover, this 
profit is now available anywhere over 60, not just exactly at 60 as it was in the origi­
nal position. Although the chances of such a rally cannot be considered great, it does 
not cost the spreader much to restructure himself into a position with a much broad­
er maximum profit area. 
A similar situation is available if the underlying stock moves up in price. In that 
case, the bull spread may be able to be removed at nearly its maximum profit poten­
tial, thereby leaving a bear spread. Again, suppose that the same initial spread was 
established but that XYZ has risen to 75. When the underlying stock advances sub­
stantially, the bull spread portion of the butterfly spread may expand to near its max­
imum potential. Since the strikes are 10 points apart in this bull spread, the widest it 
can grow to is 10 points. At the prices shown in Table 10-4, the bull spread - long 
July 50 and short July 60 - has grown to 9½ points. Thus, the bull spread position 
could be removed within ½ point of its maximum profit potential and the original 
butterfly spread would become a bear spread. Note that the closing of the bull spread 
portion generates a 9½ point credit: The July 50 is sold at 25½ and the July 60 is 
bought back at 16. The original butterfly spread was established at a 3-point debit, so 
the net position is the remaining position: 

===== PDF PAGE 235 =====
Chapter 10: The BatterRy Spread 209 
Long July 70 call . 
Short July 60 call - Net credit 6½ points 
This bear spread has a maximum profit potential of 6½ points anywhere below 60 at 
July expiration. The maximum risk is 3½ points anywhere above 70 at expiration. 
Thus, the original butterfly spread was again converted into a position such that a 
stock price reversal to any price below 60 could produce something close to the max­
imum profit. Moreover, the risk was only increased by an additional ½ point. 
TABLE 10-4. 
Initial spread and new current prices. 
I nitiol Spread 
XYZ common: 60 
XYZ July 50 call: 12 
July 60 call: 6 
July 70 call: 3 
SUMMARY 
Current Prices 
XYZ common: 
July 50 call: 
July 60 call: 
July 70 call: 
75 
25 1/2 
16 
7 
The butterfly spread is a viable, low-cost strategy with both limited profit potential 
and limited risk. It is actually a combination of a bull spread and a bear spread, and 
involves using three striking prices. The risk is limited should the underlying stock 
fall below the lowest strike or rise above the highest strike. The maximum profit is 
obtained at the middle strike. One can keep his initial debits to a minimum by ini­
tially assuming a bullish or bearish posture on the underlying stock. If he would 
rather remain neutral, he will normally have to pay a slightly larger debit to establish 
the spread, but may have a better chance of making money. If the underlying stock 
experiences a large move in one direction or the other prior to expiration, the spread­
er may want to close the profitable side of his butterfly spread near its maximum 
profit potential in order to be able to capitalize on a stock price reversal, should one 
occur. 

===== PDF PAGE 236 =====
Ratio Call Spreads 
A ratio call spread is a neutral strategy in which one buys a number of calls at a lower 
strike and sells more calls at a higher strike. It is somewhat similar to a ratio write in 
concept, although the spread has less downside risk and normally requires a smaller 
investment than does a ratio write. The ratio spread and ratio write are similar in that 
both involve uncovered calls, and both have profit ranges within which a profit can 
be made at expiration. Other comparisons are demonstrated throughout the chapter. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 44; 
XYZ April 40 call, 5; and 
XYZ April 45 call, 3. 
A 2:1 ratio call spread could be established by buying one April 40 call and simulta­
neously selling two April 45's. This spread would be done for a credit of 1 point - the 
sale of the two April 45's bringing in 6 points and the purchase of the April 40 cost­
ing 5 points. This spread can be entered as one spread order, specifying the net cred­
it or debit for the position. In this case, the spread would be entered at a net credit 
of 1 point. 
Ratio spreads, unlike ratio writes, have a relatively small, limited downside risk. 
In fact, if the spread is established at an initial credit, there is no downside risk at all. 
In a ratio spread, the profit or loss at expiration is constant below the lower striking 
price, because both options would be worthless in that area. In the example above, if 
XYZ is below 40 at April expiration, all the options would expire worthless and the 
spreader would have made a profit of his initial I-point credit, less commissions. This 
I-point gain would occur anywhere below 40 at expiration; it is a constant. 
210 

===== PDF PAGE 237 =====
Chapter 11: Ratio Call Spreads 211 
The maximum profit at expiration for a ratio spread occurs if the stock is exact­
ly at the striking price of the written options. This is true for nearly all types of strate­
gies involving written options. In the example, if XYZ were at 45 at April expiration, 
the April 45 calls would expire worthless for a gain of $600 on the two of them, and 
the April 40 call would be worth 5 points, resulting in no gain or loss on that call. 
Thus, the total profit would be $600 less commissions. 
The greatest risk in a ratio call spread lies to the upside, where the loss may the­
oretically be unlimited. The upside break-even point in this example is 51, as shown 
in Table 11-1. The table and Figure 11-1 illustrate the statements made in the pre­
ceding paragraphs. 
In a 2:1 ratio spread, two calls are sold for each one purchased. The maximum 
profit amount and the upside break-even point can easily be computed by using the 
following formulae: 
Points of maximum profit = Initial credit + Difference between strikes or 
= Difference between strikes - Initial debit 
Upside break-even point= Higher strike price+ Points of maximum profit 
In the preceding example, the initial credit was 1 point, so the points of maxi­
mum profit = 1 + 5 = 6, or $600. The upside break-even point is then 45 + 6, or 51. 
This agrees with the results determined earlier. Note that if the spread is established 
at a debit rather than a credit, the debit is subtracted from the striking price differ­
ential to determine the points of maximum profit. 
Many neutral investors prefer ratio spreads over ratio writes for two reasons: 
TABLE 11-1. 
Ratio call spread. 
XYZ Price of April 40 Coll April 45 Coll Total 
Expiration Profits Profits Profits 
35 -$ 500 +$ 600 +$100 
40 - 500 + 600 + 100 
42 - 300 + 600 + 300 
45 0 + 600 + 600 
48 + 300 0 + 300 
51 + 600 - 600 0 
55 +1,000 -1,400 - 400 
60 + 1,500 -2,400 - 900 

===== PDF PAGE 238 =====
212 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
FIGURE 11 • 1. 
Ratio call spread (2: 1 ). 
Stock Price at Expiration 
1. The downside risk or gain is predetermined in the ratio spread at expiration, and 
therefore the position does not require much monitoring on the downside. 
2. The margin investment required for a ratio spread is normally smaller than that 
required for a ratio write, since on the long side one is buying a call rather than 
buying the common stock itself. 
For margin purposes, a ratio spread is really the combination of a bull spread 
and a naked call write. There is no margin requirement for a bull spread other than 
the net debit to establish the bull spread. The net investment for the ratio spread is 
thus equal to the collateral required for the naked calls in the spread plus or minus 
the net debit or credit of the spread. In the example above, there is one naked call. 
The requirement for the naked call is 20% of the stock price plus the call premium, 
less the out-of-the-money amount. So the requirement in the example would be 20% 
of 44, or $880, plus the call premium of $300, less the one point that the stock is 
below the striking price - a $1,080 requirement for the naked call. Since the spread 
was established at a credit of one point, this credit can also be applied against the ini­
tial requirement, thereby reducing that requirement to $980. Since there is a naked 
call in this spread, there will be a mark to market if the stock moves up. Just as was 
recommended for the ratio write, it is recommended that the ratio spreader allow at 
least enough collateral to reach the upside break-even point. Since the upside break­
even point is 51 in this example, the spreader should allow 20% of 51, or $1,020, plus 

===== PDF PAGE 239 =====
Chapter 11: Ratio Call Spreads 213 
the 6 points that the call would be worth less the 1-point initial net credit - a total of 
$1,520 for this spread ($1,020 + $600 - $100). 
DIFFERING PHILOSOPHIES 
For many strategies, there is more than one philosophy of how to implement the 
strategy. Ratio spreads are no exception, with three philosophies being predominant. 
One philosophy holds that ratio spreading is quite similar to ratio writing - that one 
should be looking for opportunities to purchase an in-the-money call with little or no 
time premium in it so that the ratio spread simulates the profit opportunities from 
the ratio write as closely as possible with a smaller investment. The ratio spreads 
established under this philosophy may have rather large debits if the purchased call 
is substantially in-the-money. Another philosophy of ratio spreading is that spreads 
should be established for credits so that there is no chance of losing money on the 
downside. Both philosophies have merit and both are described. A third philosophy, 
called the "delta spread," is more concerned with neutrality, regardless of the initial 
debit or credit. It is also described. 
RATIO SPREAD AS RATIO WRITE 
There are several spread strategies similar to strategies that involve common stock. In 
this case, the ratio spread is similar to the ratio write. Whenever such a similarity 
exists, it may be possible for the strategist to buy an in-the-money call with little or no 
time premium as a substitute for buying the common stock. This was seen earlier in 
the covered call writing strategy, where it was shown that the purchase of in-the­
money calls or warrants might be a viable substitute for the purchase of stock. If one 
is able to buy an in-the-rrwney call as a substitute for the stock, he will not affect his 
profit potential substantially. When comparing a ratio spread to a ratio write, the max­
imum profit potential and the profit range are reduced by the time value premium 
paid for the long call. If this call is at parity (the time value premium is thus zero), the 
ratio spread and the ratio write have exactly the same profit potential. Moreover, the 
net investment is reduced and there is less downside risk should the stock fall in price 
below the striking price of the purchased call. The spread also involves smaller com­
mission costs than does the ratio write, which involves a stock purchase. The ratio 
writer does receive stock dividends, if any are paid, whereas the spreader does not. 
Example: XYZ is at 50, and an XYZ July 40 call is selling for 11 while an XYZ July 50 
call is selling for 5. Table 11-2 compares the important points between the ratio write 
and the ratio spread. 

===== PDF PAGE 240 =====
214 
TABLE 11-2. 
Ratio write and ratio spread compared. 
Profit range 
Maximum profit 
Downside risk 
Upside risk 
Initial investment 
Ratio Write: 
Buy XYZ of 50 and 
Sell 2 July SO's at 5 
40 to 60 
10 points 
40 points 
40 points 
$3,000 
Part II: Call Option Strategies 
Ratio Spread: 
Buy 1 July 40 of 11 and 
Sell 2 July SO's at 5 
41 to 59 
9 points 
1 point 
Unlimited 
$1,600 
In Chapter 6, it was pointed out that ratio writing was one of the better strate­
gies from a probability of profit viewpoint. That is, the profit potential conforms well 
to the expected movement of the underlying stock. The same statement holds true 
for ratio spreads as substitutes for ratio writes. In fact, the ratio spread may often be 
a better position than the ratio write itself, when the long call can be purchased with 
little or no time value premium in it. 
RATIO SPREAD FOR CREDITS 
The second philosophy of ratio spreads is to establish them only for credits. 
Strategists who follow this philosophy generally want a second criterion fulfilled also: 
that the underlying stock be below the striking price of the written calls when the 
spread is established. In fact, the farther the stock is below the strike, the more 
attractive the spread would be. This type of ratio spread has no downside risk 
because, even if the stock collapses, the spreader will still make a profit equal to the 
initial credit received. This application of the ratio spread strategy is actually a sub­
case of the application discussed above. That is, it may be possible both to buy a long 
call for little or no time premium, thereby simulating a ratio write, and also to be able 
to set up the position for a credit. 
Since the underlying stock is generally below the maximum profit point when 
one establishes a ratio spread for a credit, this is actually a mildly bullish position. 
The investor would want the stock to move up slightly in order for his maximum prof­
it potential to be realized. Of course, the position does have unlimited upside risk, so 
it is not an overly bullish strategy. 

===== PDF PAGE 241 =====
Chapter 11: Ratio Call Spreads 215 
These two philosophies are not mutually exclusive. The strategist who uses ratio 
spreads without regard for whether they are debit or credit spreads will generally 
have a broader array of spreads to choose from and will also be able to assume a more 
neutral posture on the stock. The spreader who insists on generating credits only will 
be forced to establish spreads on which his return will be slightly smaller if the under­
lying stock remains relatively unchanged. However, he will not have to worry about 
downside defensive action, since he has no risk to the downside. The third philoso­
phy, the "delta spread," is described after the next section, in which the uses of ratios 
other than 2: 1 are described. 
ALTERING THE RATIO 
Under either of the two philosophies discussed above, the strategist may find that a 
3:1 ratio or a 3:2 ratio better suits his purposes than the 2:1 ratio. It is not common 
to write in a ratio of greater than 4: 1 because of the large increase in upside risk at 
such high ratios. The higher the ratio that is used, the higher will be the credits of 
the spread. This means that the profits to the downside will be greater if the stock 
collapses. The lower the ratio that is used, the higher the upside break-even point will 
be, thereby reducing upside risk. 
Example: If the same prices are used as in the initial example in this chapter, it will 
be possible to demonstrate these facts using three different ratios (Table 11-3): 
XYZ common, 44; 
XYZ April 40 call, 5; and 
XYZ April 45 call, 3. 
TABLE 11-3. 
Comparison of three ratios. 
Price of spread 
(downside risk) 
Upside break-even 
Downside break-even 
Maximum profit 
3:2 Ratio: 
Buy 2 April 40's 
Sell 3 April 45's 
1 debit 
54 
401/2 
9 
2:1 Ratio: 3:1 Ratio: 
By 1 April 40 Buy 1 April 40 
Sell 2 April 45's Sell 3 April 45's 
1 credit 4 credit 
51 49½ 
None None 
6 9 

===== PDF PAGE 242 =====
216 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
In Chapter 6 on ratio writing, it was seen that it was possible to alter the ratio 
to adjust the position to one's outlook for the underlying stock The altering of the 
ratio in a ratio spread accomplishes the same objective. In fact, as will be pointed out 
later in the chapter, the ratio may be adjusted continuously to achieve what is con­
sidered to be a "neutral spread." A similar tactic, using the option's delta, was 
described for ratio writes. 
The following formulae allow one to determine the maximum profit potential 
and upside break~even point for any ratio: 
Points of maximum = Net credit+ Number oflong calls x 
profit Difference in striking prices or 
= Number of long calls X Difference in 
striking prices - Net debit 
Upside break-even = Points of maximum profit ff h t "ki . 
point Number of naked calls + ig er s n ng pnce 
These formulae can easily be verified by checking the numbers in Table 11-3. 
THE "DELTA SPREAD" 
The third philosophy of ratio spreading is a more sophisticated approach that is often 
referred to as the delta spread, because the deltas of the options are used to estab­
lish and monitor the spread. Recall that the delta of a call option is the amount by 
which the option is expected to increase in price if the underlying stock should rise 
by one point. Delta spreads are neutral spreads in that one uses the deltas of the two 
calls to set up a position that is initially neutral. 
Example: The deltas of the two calls that appeared in the previous examples were 
.80 and .50 for the April 40 and April 45, respectively. If one were to buy 5 of the 
April 40's and simultaneously sell 8 of the April 45's, he would have a delta-neutral 
spread. That is, if XYZ moved up by one point, the 5 April 40 calls would appreciate 
by .80 point each, for a net gain of 4 points. Similarly, the 8 April 45 calls that he is 
short would each appreciate by .50 point for a net loss of 4 points on the short side. 
Thus, the spread is initially neutral - the long side and the short side will offset each 
other. The idea of setting up this type of neutral spread is to be able to capture the 
time value premium decay in the preponderance of short calls without subjecting the 
spread to an inordinate amount of market risk. The actual credit or debit of the 
spread is not a determining factor. 

===== PDF PAGE 243 =====
Chapter 11: Ratio Call Spreads 217 
It is a fairly simple matter to determine the correct ratio to use in the delta 
spread: Merely divide the delta of the purchased call by the delta of the written call. 
In the example, this implies that the neutral ratio is .80 divided by .50, or 1.6:1. 
Obviously, one cannot sell 1.6 calls, so it is common practice to express that ratio as 
16:10. Thus, the neutral spread would consist of buying 10 April 40's and selling 16 
April 45's. This is the same as an 8:5 ratio. Notice that this calculation does not 
include anything about debits or credits involved in the spread. In this example, an 
8:5 ratio would involve a small debit of one point (5 April 40's cost 25 points and 8 
April 45's bring in 24 points). Generally, reasonably selected delta spreads involve 
small debits. 
Certain selection criteria can be offered to help the spreader eliminate some of 
the myriad possibilities of delta spreads on a day-to-day basis. First, one does not 
want the ratio of the spread to be too large. An absolute limit, such as 4:1, can be 
placed on all spread candidates. Also, if one eliminates any options selling for less 
than ½ point as candidates for the short side of the spread, the higher ratios will be 
eliminated. Second, one does not want the ratio to be too small. If the delta-neutral 
ratio is less than 1.2:1 (6:5), the spread should probably be rejected. Finally, if one is 
concerned with downside risk, he might want to limit the total debit outlay. This 
might be done with a simple parameter, such as not paying a debit of more than 1 
point per long option. Thus, in a spread involving 10 long calls, the total debit must 
be 10 points or less. These screens are easily applied, especially with the aid of a com­
puter analysis. One merely uses the deltas to determine the neutral ratio. Then, if it 
is too small or too large, or if it requires the outlay of too large a debit, the spread is 
rejected from consideration. If not, it is a potential candidate for investment. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
Depending on the initial credit or debit of the spread, it may not be necessary to take 
any downside defensive action at all. If the initial debit was large, the writer may roll 
down the written calls as in a ratio write. 
Example: An investor has established the ratio write by buying an XYZ July 40 call 
and selling two July 60 calls with the stock near 60. He might have done this because 
the July 40 was selling at parity. If the underlying stock declines, this spreader could 
roll down to the 50's and then to the 45's, in the same manner as he would with a ratio 
write. On the other hand, if the spread was initially set up with contiguous striking 
prices, the lower strike being just below the higher strike, no rolling-down action 
would be necessary. 

===== PDF PAGE 244 =====
218 Part II: Call Option Strategies 
REDUCING THE RATIO 
Upside fallow-up action does not normally consist of rolling up as it does in a ratio 
write. Rather, one should usually buy some more long calls to reduce the ratio in the 
spread. Eventually, he would want to reduce the spread to 1:1, or a normal bull 
spread. An example may help to illustrate this concept. 
Example: In the initial example, one April 40 call was bought and two April 45's were 
sold, for a net credit of one point. Assume that the spreader is going to buy one more 
April 40 as a means of upside defensive action if he has to. When and if he buys this 
second long call, his total position will be a normal bull spread - long 2 April 40's and 
short 2 April 45's. The liquidating value of this bull spread would be 10 points if XYZ 
were above 45 at April expiration, since each of the two bull spreads would widen to 
its maximum potential (5 points) with the stock above 45 in April. The ratio spread­
er originally brought in a one-point credit for the 2:1 spread. If he were later to pay 
11 points to buy the additional long April 40 call, his total outlay would have been 10 
points. This would represent a break-even situation at April expiration if XYZ were 
above 45 at that time, since it was just shown that the spread could be liquidated for 
10 points in that case. So the ratio spreader could wait to take defensive action until 
the April call was selling for 11 points. This is a dynamic type of follow-up action, one 
that is dependent on the options' price, not the stock price per se. 
This outlay of 11 points for the April 40 would leave a break-even situation as 
long as the stock did not reverse and fall in price below 45 after the call was bought. 
The spreader may decide that he would rather leave some room for upside profit 
rather than merely trying to break even if the stock rallies too far. He might thus 
decide to buy the additional long call at 9 or 10 points rather than waiting for it to get 
to 11. Of course, this might increase the chances of a whipsaw occurring, but it would 
leave some room for upside profits if the stock continues to rise. 
Where ratios other than 2:1 are involved initially, the same thinking can be 
applied. In fact, the purchase of the additional long calls might take place in a two­
step process. 
Example: If the spread was initially long 5 calls and short 10 calls, the spreader 
would not necessarily have to wait until the April 40's were selling at 11 and then buy 
all 5 needed to make the spread a normal bull spread. He might decide to buy 2 or 
3 at a lower price, thereby reducing his ratio somewhat. Then, if the stock rallied 
even further, he could buy the needed long calls. By buying a few at a cheaper price, 
the spreader gives himself the leeway to wait considerably longer to the upside. In 
essence, all 5 additional long calls in this spread would have to be bought at an aver­
age price of 11 or lower in order for the spread to break even. However, if the first 2 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 15 | PDF PAGES 273-285 =====

===== PDF PAGE 273 =====
CHAPTER 15 
Put Option Basics 
Much of the same terminology that is applied to call options also pertains to put 
options. Underlying security, striking price, and expiration date are all terms that 
have the same meaning for puts as they do for calls. The expiration dates of listed put 
options agree with the expiration dates of the calls on the same underlying stock. In 
addition, puts and calls have the same striking prices. This means that if there are 
options at a certain strike, say on a particular underlying stock that has both listed 
puts and calls, both calls at 50 and puts at 50 will be trading, regardless of the price 
of the underlying stock. Note that it is no longer sufficient to describe an option as 
an "XYZ July 50." It must also be stated whether the option is a put or a call, for an 
XYZ July 50 call and an XYZ July 50 put are two different securities. 
In many respects, the put option and its associated strategies will be very near­
ly the opposite of corresponding call-oriented strategies. However, it is not correct to 
say that the put is exactly the opposite of a call. In this introductory section on puts, 
the characteristics of puts are described in an attempt to show how they are similar 
to calls and how they are not. 
PUT STRATEGIES 
In the simplest terms, the outright buyer of a put is hopingfor a stock price decline 
in order for his put to become more valuable. If the stock were to decline well below 
the striking price of the put option, the put holder could make a profit. The holder 
of the put could buy stock in the open market and then exercise his put to sell that 
stock for a profit at the striking price, which is higher. 
Example: If XYZ stock is at 40, an XYZ July 50 put would be worth at least 10 points, 
for the put grants the holder the right to sell XYZ at 50 10 points above its current 
245 

===== PDF PAGE 274 =====
246 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
price. On the other hand, if the stock price were above the striking price of the put 
option at expiration, the put would be worthless. No one would logically want to exer­
cise a put option to sell stock at the striking price when he could merely go to the 
open market and sell the stock for a higher price. Thus, as the price of the underly­
ing stock declines, the put becomes more valuable. This is, of course, the opposite of 
a call option's price action. 
The meaning of in-the-money and out-of-the-money are altered when one is 
speaking of put options. A put is considered to be in-the-money when the underlying 
stock is below the striking price of the put option; it is out-of the-money when the 
stock is above the striking price. This, again, is the opposite of the call option. IfXYZ 
is at 45, the XYZ July 50 put is in-the-money and the XYZ July 50 call is out-of-the­
money. However, ifXYZ were at 55, the July 50 put would be out-of-the-money while 
the July 50 call would be in-the-money. The broad definition of an in-the-money 
option as "an option that has intrinsic value" would cover the situation for both puts 
and calls. Note that a put option has intrinsic value when the underlying stock is 
below the striking price of the put. That is, the put has some "real" value when the 
stock is below the striking price. 
The intrinsic value of an in-the-money put is merely the difference between 
the striking price and the stock price. Since the put is an option (to sell), it will gen­
erally sell for more than its intrinsic value when there is time remaining until the 
expiration date. This excess value over its intrinsic value is referred to as the time 
value premium, just as is the case with calls. 
Example: XYZ is at 47 and the XYZ July 50 put is selling for 5, the intrinsic value is 
3 points (50- 47), so the time value premium must be 2 points. The time value pre­
mium of an in-the-money put option can always be quickly computed by the follow­
ing formula: 
Time value premium p . S k · St "ki · • ) == ut option + toe pnce - n ng pnce (m-the-money put 
This is not the same formula that was applied to in-the-money call options, although 
it is always true that the time value premium of an option is the excess value over 
intrinsic value. 
Time value premium Call ti S ·ki · St k · . all == op on + tn ng pnce - oc pnce (m-the-money c ) 
If the put is out-of-the-money, the entire premium of the put is composed of time 
value premium, for the intrinsic value of an out-of-the-money option is always zero. 

===== PDF PAGE 275 =====
O.,,ter 15: Put Option Basks 247 
The time value premium of a put is largest when the stock is at the striking price of 
the put. As the option becomes deeply in-the-money or deeply out-of-the-money, the 
time value premium will shrink substantially. These statements on the magnitude of 
the time value premium are true for both puts and calls. Table 15-1 will help to illus­
trate the relationship of stock price and option price for both puts and calls. The 
reader may want to refer to Table 1-1, which described the time value premium rela­
tionship for calls. Table 15-1 describes the prices of an XYZ July 50 call option and 
an XYZ July 50 put option. 
Table 15-1 demonstrates several basic facts. As the stock drops, the actual price 
of a call option decreases while the value of the put option increases. Conversely, as 
the stock rises, the call option increases in value and the put option decreases in 
value. Both the put and the call have their maximum time value premium when the 
stock is exactly at the striking price. However, the call will generally sell for rrwre than 
the put when the stock is at the strike. Notice in Table 15-1 that, with XYZ at 50, the 
call is worth 5 points while the put is worth only 4 points. This is true in general, 
except in the case of a stock that pays a large dividend. This phenomenon has to do 
with the cost of carrying stock. More will be said about this effect later. Table 15-1 
also describes an effect of put options that normally holds true: An in-the-rrwney put 
( stock is below strike) loses time value premium rrwre quickly than an in-the-rrwney 
call does. Notice that with XYZ at 43 in Table 15-1, the put is 7 points in-the-money 
and has lost all its time value premium. But when the call is 7 points in-the-money, 
XYZ at 57, the call still has 2 points of time value premium. Again, this is a phenom­
enon that could be affected by the dividend payout of the underlying stock, but is 
true in general. 
PRICING PUT OPTIONS 
The same factors that determine the price of the call option also determine the price 
of the put option: price of the underlying stock, striking price of the option, time 
remaining until expiration, volatility of the underlying stock, dividend rate of the 
underlying stock, and the current risk-free interest rate (Treasury bill rate, for exam­
ple). Market dynamics - supply, demand, and investor psychology - play a part as 
well. 
Without going into as much detail as was shown in Chapter 1, the pricing curve 
of the put option can be developed. Certain facts remain true for the put option as 
they did for the call option. The rate of decay of the put option is not linear; that is, 
the time value premium will decay more rapidly in the weeks immediately preced­
ing expiration. The more volatile the underlying stock, the higher will be the price 

===== PDF PAGE 276 =====
248 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
TABLE 15-1. 
Call and put options compared. 
XYZ XYZ Coll Coll XYZ Put Put 
Stock July 50 Intrinsic Time Value July 50 Intrinsic Time Value 
Price Coll Price Value Premium Put Price Value Premium 
40 1/2 0 1/2 93/4 10 -1/4* 
43 1 0 1 7 7 0 
45 2 0 2 6 5 
47 3 0 3 5 3 2 
50 5 0 5 4 0 4 
53 7 3 4 3 0 3 
55 8 5 3 2 0 2 
57 9 7 2 0 
60 101/2 10 1/2 1/2 0 l/2 
70 193/4 20 -1/4 * 1/4 0 1/4 
* A deeply in-the-money option may actually trade at a discount from intrinsic value in advance of 
expiration. 
of its options, both puts and calls. Moreover, the marketplace may at any time value 
options at a higher or lower volatility than the underlying stock actually exhibits. 
This is called implied volatility, as distinguished from actual volatility. Also, the put 
option is usually worth at least its intrinsic value at any time, and should be worth 
exactly its intrinsic value on the day that it expires. Figure 15-1 shows where one 
might expect the XYZ July 50 put to sell, for any stock price, if there are 6 months 
remaining until expiration. Compare this with the similar pricing curve for the call 
option (Figure 15-2). Note that the intrinsic value line for the put option faces in 
the opposite direction from the intrinsic value line for call options; that is, it gains 
value as the stock falls below the striking price. This put option pricing curve 
demonstrates the effect mentioned earlier, that a put option loses time value pre­
mium more quickly when it is in-the-money, and also shows that an out-of-the­
money put holds a great deal of time value premium. 
THE EFFECT OF DIVIDENDS ON PUT OPTION PREMIUMS 
The dividend of the underlying stock is a negative factor on the price of its call 
options. The opposite is true for puts. The larger the dividend, the nwre valuable the 
puts will be. This is true because, as the stock goes ex-dividend, it will be reduced in 

===== PDF PAGE 277 =====
Cl,opter 15: Put Option Basics 
FIGURE 1 5-1. 
Put option price curve. 
~ 
it 
C: 
.Q 
a. 
0 
FIGURE 1 5-2. 
Call option price curve. 
~ 
ct 
C: 
0 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
a 5 
Striking 
Price (50) 
Greatest 
Value for 
Time Value 
Stock Price 
0 4 ----------------------
3 
2 
1 
0 
40 45 
represents the option's 
time value premium. ________ L ________ _ 
50\ 55 60 Stock Price Intrinsic value 
remains at zero 
until striking price 
is passed. 
249 
price by the amount of the dividend. That is, the stock will decrease in price and 
therefore the put will become more valuable. Consequently, the buyer of the put will 
be willing to pay a higher price for the put and the seller of the put will also demand 
a higher price. As with listed calls, listed puts are not adjusted for the payment of cash 
dividends on the underlying stock. However, the price of the option itself will reflect 
the dividend payments on the stock. 

===== PDF PAGE 278 =====
250 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Example: XYZ is selling for $25 per share and will pay $1 in dividends over the next 
6 months. Then a 6-month put option with strike 25 should automatically be worth 
at least $1, regardless of any other factor concerning the underlying stock. During the 
next 6 months, the stock will be reduced in price by the amount of its dividends- $1 
- and if everything else remained the same, the stock would then be at 24. With the 
stock at 24, the put would be 1 point in-the-money and would thus be worth at least 
its intrinsic value of 1 point. Thus, in advance, this large dividend payout of the 
underlying stock will help to increase the price of the put options on this stock. 
On the day before a stock goes ex-dividend, the time value premium of an in­
the-money put should be at least as large as the impending cash dividend payment. 
That is, if XYZ is 40 and is about to pay a $.50 dividend, an XYZ January 50 put should 
sell for at least l 0½. This is true because the stock will be reduced in price by the 
amount of its dividend on the day of the ex-dividend. 
EXERCISE AND ASSIGNMENT 
When the holder of a put option exercises his option, he sells stock at the striking 
price. He may exercise this right at any time during the life of the put option. When 
this happens, the writer of a put option with the same terms is assigned an obligation 
to buy stock at the striking price. It is important to notice the difference between 
puts and calls in this case. The call holder exercises to buy stock and the call writer is 
obligated to sell stock. The reverse is true for the put holder and writer. 
The methods of assignment via the OCC and the brokerage firm are the same 
for puts and calls; any fair method of random or first-in/first-out assignment is 
allowed. Stock commissions are charged on both the purchase and sale of the stock 
via the assignment and exercise. 
When the holder of a put option exercises his right to sell stock, he may be sell­
ing stock that he currently holds in his portfolio. Second, he may simultaneously go 
into the open market and buy stock for sale via the put exercise. Finally, he may want 
to sell the stock in his short stock account; that is, he may short the underlying stock 
by exercising his put option. He would have to be able to borrow stock and supply 
the margin collateral for a short sale of stock if he chose this third course of action. 
The writer of the put option also has several choices in how he wants to handle 
the stock purchase that he is required to make. The put writer who is assigned must 
receive stock. (The call writer who is assigned delivers stock.) The put writer may cur­
rently be short the underlying stock, in which case he will merely use the receipt of 
stock from the assignment to cover his short sale. He may also decide to immediate-

===== PDF PAGE 279 =====
0.,ter 15: Put Option Basics 251 
ly sell stock in the open market to offset the purchase that he is forced to make via 
the put assignment. Finally, he may decide to retain the stock that is delivered to him; 
he merely keeps the stock in his portfolio. He would, of course, have to pay for ( or 
margin) the stock if he decides to keep it. 
The mechanics as to how the put holder wants to deliver the stock and how the 
put writer wants to receive the stock are relatively simple. Each one merely notifies 
his brokerage firm of the way in which he wants to operate and, provided that he can 
meet the margin requirements, the exercise or assignment will be made in the 
desired manner. 
ANTICIPATING ASSIGNMENT 
The writer of a put option can anticipate assignment in the same way that the writer 
of a call can. When the time value premium of an in-the-money put option disappears, 
there is a risk of assignment, regardless of the time remaining until expiration. In 
Chapter 1, a form of arbitrage was described in which market-makers or firm traders, 
who pay little or no commissions, can take advantage of an in-the-money call selling 
at a discount to parity. Similarly, there is a method for these traders to take advantage 
of an in-the-money put selling at a discount to parity. 
Example: XYZ is at 40 and an XYZ July 50 put is selling for 9¾ a ¼ discount from 
parity. That is, the option is selling for ¼ point below its intrinsic value. The arbi­
trageur could take advantage of this situation through the following actions: 
1. Buy the July put at 9¾. 
2. Buy XYZ common stock at 40. 
3. Exercise the put to sell XYZ at 50. 
The arbitrageur makes 10 points on the stock portion of the transaction, buying the 
common at 40 and selling it at 50 via exercise of his put. He paid 9¾ for the put 
option and he loses this entire amount upon exercise. However, his overall profit is 
thus ¼ point, the amount of the original discount from parity. Since his commission 
costs are minimal, he can actually make a net profit on this transaction. 
As was the case with deeply in-the-money calls, this type of arbitrage with 
deeply in-the-money puts provides a secondary market that might not otherwise 
exist. It allows the public holder of an in-the-money put to sell his option at a price 
near its intrinsic value. Without these arbitrageurs, there might not be a reasonable 
secondary market in which public put holders could liquidate. 

===== PDF PAGE 280 =====
252 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Dividend payment dates may also have an effect on the frequency of assign­
ment. For call options, the writer might expect to receive an assignment on the day 
the stock goes ex-dividend. The holder of the call is able to collect the dividend by 
so exercising. Things are slightly different for the writer of puts. He might expect 
to receive an assignment on the day after the ex-dividend date of the underlying 
stock. Since the writer of the put is obligated to buy stock, it is unlikely that any­
one would put the stock to him until after the dividend has been paid. In any case, 
the writer of the put can use a relatively simple gauge to anticipate assignment near 
the ex-dividend date. If the time value premium of an in-the-money put is less than 
the amount of the dividend to be paid, the writer may often anticipate that he will 
be assigned immediately after the ex-dividend of the stock. An example will show 
why this is true. 
Example: XYZ is at 45 and it will pay a $.50 dividend. Furthermore, the XYZ July 50 
put is selling at 5¼. Note that the time value premium of the July 50 put is ¼ point 
- less than the amount of the dividend, which is ½ point. An arbitrageur could take 
the following actions: 
1. Buy XYZ at 45. 
2. Buy the July 50 put at 5¼. 
3. Collect the ½-point dividend (he must hold the stock until the ex-date to collect 
the dividend). 
4. Exercise his put to sell XYZ at 50 ( writer would receive assignment on the day 
after the ex-date). 
The arbitrageur makes 5 points on the stock trades, buying XYZ at 45 and selling it 
at 50 via exercise of the put. He also collects the ½-point dividend, making his total 
intake equal to 5½ points. He loses the 5¼ points that he paid for the put but still 
has a net profit of ¼ point. Thus, as the ex-dividend date of a stock approaches, the 
time value premium of all in-the-money puts on that stock will tend to equal or exceed 
the amount of the dividend payment. 
This is quite different from the call option. It was shown in Chapter 1 that the 
call writer only needs to observe whether the call was trading at or below parity, 
regardless of the amount of the dividend, as the ex-dividend date approaches. The 
put writer must determine if the time value premium of the put exceeds the amount 
of the dividend to be paid. If it does, there is a much smaller chance of assignment 
because of the dividend. In any case, the put writer can anticipate the assignment if 
he carefully monitors his position. 

===== PDF PAGE 281 =====
O.,ter 15: Put Option Basics 
POSITION LIMITS 
253 
Recall that the position limit rule states that one cannot have a position of more than 
the limit of options on the same side of the market in the same underlying security. 
The limit varies depending on the trading activity and volatility of the underlying stock 
and is set by the exchange on which the options are traded. The actual limits are 
13,500, 22,500, 31,500, 60,000, or 75,000 contracts, depending on these factors. One 
cannot have more than 75,000 option contracts on the bullish side of the market - long 
calls and/or short puts - nor can he have more than 75,000 contracts on the bearish 
side of the market - short calls and/or long puts. He may, however, have 75,000 con­
tracts on each side of the market; he could simultaneously be long 75,000 calls and 
long 75,000 puts. 
For the following examples, assume that one is concerned with an underlying 
stock whose position limit is 75,000 contracts. 
Long 75,000 calls, long 75,000 puts - no violation; 75,000 contracts bullish (long 
calls) and 75,000 contracts bearish (long puts). 
Long 38,000 calls, short 37,000 puts - no violation; total of 75,000 contracts bullish. 
Long 38,000 calls, short 38,000 puts - violation; total of 76,000 contracts bullish. 
Money managers should be aware that these position limits apply to all "related" 
accounts, so that someone managing several accounts must total all the accounts' 
positions when considering the position limit rule. 
CONVERSION 
Many of the relationships between call prices and put prices relate to a process 
known as a conversion. This term dates back to the over-the-counter option days 
when a dealer who owned a put ( or could buy one) was able to satisfy the needs of a 
potential call buyer by "converting" the put to a call. This terminology is somewhat 
confusing, and the actual position that the dealer would take is little more than an 
arbitrage position. In the listed market, arbitrageurs and firm traders can set up the 
same position that the converter did. 
The actual details of the conversion process, which must include the carrying 
cost of owning stock and the inclusion of all dividends to be paid by the stock during 
the time the position is held, are described later. However, it is important for the put 
option trader to understand what the arbitrageur is attempting to do in order for him 
to fully understand the relationship between put and call prices in the listed option 
market. 

===== PDF PAGE 282 =====
254 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
A conversion position has no risk. The arbitrageur will do three things: 
1. Buy 100 shares of the underlying stock. 
2. Buy 1 put option at a certain striking price. 
3. Sell l call option at the same striking price. 
The arbitrageur has no risk in this position. If the underlying stock drops, he can 
always exercise his long put to sell the stock at a higher price. If the underlying stock 
rises, his long stock offsets the loss on his short call. Of course, the prices that the 
arbitrageur pays for the individual securities determine whether or not a conversion 
will be profitable. At times, a public customer may look at prices in the newspaper 
and see that he could establish a position similar to the foregoing one for a profit, 
even after commissions. However, unless prices are out of line, the public customer 
would not normally be able to make a better return than he could by putting his 
money into a bank or a Treasury bill, because of the commission costs he would pay. 
Without needing to understand, at this time, exactly what prices would make an 
attractive conversion, it is possible to see that it would not always be possible for the 
arbitrageur to do a conversion. The mere action of many arbitrageurs doing the same 
conversion would force the prices into line. The stock price would rise because arbi­
trageurs are buying the stock, as would the put price; and the call price would drop 
because of the preponderance of sellers. 
When this happens, another arbitrage, known as a reversal ( or reverse conver­
sion), is possible. In this case, the arbitrageur does the opposite: He shorts the under­
lying stock, sells 1 put, and buys 1 call. Again, this is a position with no risk. If the 
stock rises, he can always exercise his call to buy stock at a lower price and cover his 
short sale. If the stock falls, his short stock will offset any losses on his short put. 
The point of introducing this information, which is relatively complicated, at 
this place in the text is to demonstrate that there is a relationship between put and 
call prices, when both have the same striking price and expiration date. They are not 
independent of one another. If the put becomes "cheap" with respect to the call, arbi­
trageurs will move in to do conversions and force the prices back in line. On the other 
hand, if the put becomes expensive with relationship to the call, arbitrageurs will do 
reversals until the prices move back into line. 
Because of the way in which the carrying cost of the stock and the dividend rate 
of the stock are involved in doing these conversions or reversals, two facts come to 
light regarding the relationship of put prices and call prices. Both of these facts have 
to do with the carrying costs incurred during the conversion. First, a put option will 
generally sell for less than a call option when the underlying stock is exactly at the 
striking price, unless the stock pays a large dividend. In the older over-the-counter 

===== PDF PAGE 283 =====
a,,pter 15: Put Option Basics 255 
option market, it was often stated that the reason for this relationship was that the 
demand for calls was larger than the demand for puts. This may have been partially 
true, but certainly it is no longer true in the listed option targets, where a large sup­
ply of both listed puts and calls is available through the OCC. Arbitrageurs again 
serve a useful function in increasing supply and demand where it might not other­
wise exist. The second fact concerning the relationship of puts and calls is that a put 
option will lose its time value premium much more quickly in-the-money than a call 
option will (and, conversely, a put option will generally hold out-of-the-money time 
value premium better than a call option will). Again, the conversion and reversal 
processes play a large role in this price action phenomenon of puts and calls. Both of 
these facts have to do with the carrying costs involved in the conversion. 
In the chapter on Arbitrage, exact details of conversions and reversals will be 
spelled out, with specific reasons why these procedures affect the relationship of put 
and call prices as stated above. However, at this time, it is sufficient for the reader to 
understand that there is an arbitrage process that is quite widely practiced that will, 
in fact, make true the foregoing relationships between puts and calls. 

===== PDF PAGE 284 =====
Put Option Buying 
The purchase of a put option provides leverage in the case of a downward move by 
the underlying stock. In this manner, it is an alternative to the short sale of stock, 
much as the purchase of a call option is a leveraged alternative to the purchase of 
stock. 
PUT BUYING VERSUS SHORT SALE 
In the simplest case, when an investor expects a stock to decline in price, he may 
either short the underlying stock or buy a put option on the stock. Suppose that XYZ 
is at 50 and that an XYZ July 50 put option is trading at 5. If the underlying stock 
declines substantially, the buyer of the put could make profits considerably in excess 
of his initial investment. However, if the underlying stock rises in price, the put buyer 
has limited risk; he can lose only the amount of money that he originally paid for the 
put option. In this example, the most that the put buyer could lose would be 5 points, 
which is equal to his entire initial investment. Table 16-1 and Figure 16-1 depict the 
results, at expiration, of this simple purchase of the put option. 
The put buyer has limited profit potential, since a stock can never drop in price 
below zero dollars per share. However, his potential profits can be huge, percent­
agewise. His loss, which normally would occur if the stock rises in price, is limited to 
the amount of his initial investment. The simplest use of a put purchase is for specu­
lative purposes when expecting a price decline in the underlying stock. 
These results for the profit or loss of the put option purchases can be compared 
to a similar short sale of XYZ at 50 in order to observe the benefits of leverage and 
limited risk that the put option buyer achieves. In order to sell short 100 XYZ at 50, 
assume that the trader would have to use $2,500 in margin. Several points can be ver-
256 

===== PDF PAGE 285 =====
Gopter 16: Put Option Buying 
TABLE 16-1. 
Results of put purchase at expiration. 
XYZ Price ot Put Price ot 
Expiration Expiration 
20 
30 
40 
45 
48 
50 
60 
70 
FIGURE 16-1. 
Put option purchase. 
30 
20 
10 
5 
2 
0 
0 
0 
Stock Price at Expiration 
257 
Put Option 
Profit 
+$2,500 
+ 1,500 
+ 500 
0 
300 
500 
500 
500 
ifled from Table 16-2 and Figure 16-1. If the stock drops in price sufficiently far, the 
percentage profits are much greater on the put option purchase than they are on the 
short sale of the underlying stock. This is the leveraging effect that an option pur-
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 16 | PDF PAGES 286-301 =====

===== PDF PAGE 286 =====
258 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
chase can achieve. If the underlying stock remains relatively unchanged, the short 
seller would do better because he does not risk losing his entire investment in a lim­
ited amount of time if the underlying stock changes only slightly in price. However, 
if the underlying stock should rise dramatically, the short seller can actually lose more 
than his initial investment. The short sale of stock has theoretically unlimited risk. 
Such is not true of the put option purchase, whereby the risk is limited to the amount 
of the initial investment. One other point should be made when comparing the pur­
chase of a put and the short sale of stock: The short seller of stock is obligated to pay 
the dividends on the stock, but the put option holder has no such obligation. This is 
an additional advantage to the holder of the put. 
TABLE 16-2. 
Results of selling short. 
XYZ Price at Put Option 
Expiration Short Sale Purchase 
20 + $3,000 (+ 120%) +$2,500 (+ 500%) 
30 + 2,000 (+ 80%) + 1,500 (+ 300%) 
40 + 1,000 (+ 40%) + 500 (+ 100%) 
45 + 500(+ 20%) 0( 0%) 
48 + 200(+ 80%) 300 (- 60%) 
50 0( 0%) 500 (- 100%) 
60 - 1,000 (- 40%) 500 (- 100%) 
75 - 2,500 (- 100%) 500 (- 100%) 
100 - 5,000 (- 200%) 500 (- 100%) 
SELECTING WHICH PUT TO BUY 
Many of the same types of analyses that the call buyer goes through in deciding which 
call to buy can be used by the prospective put buyer as well. First, when approach­
ing put buying as a speculative strategy, one should not place more than 15% of his 
risk capital in the strategy. Some investors participate in put buying to add some 
amount of downside protection to their basically bullishly-oriented common stock 
portfolios. More is said in Chapter 17 about buying puts on stocks that one actually 
owns. 
The out-ofthe-nwney put offers both higher reward potentials and higher risk 
potentials than does the in-the-nwney put. If the underlying stock drops substantial-

===== PDF PAGE 287 =====
G,pter 16: Put Option Buying 259 
ly, the percentage returns from having purchased a cheaper, out-of-the-money put 
will be greater. However, should the underlying stock decline only moderately in 
price, the in-the-rrwney put will often prove to be the better choice. In fact, since a 
put option tends to lose its time value premium quickly as it becomes an in-the­
money option, there is an even greater advantage to the purchase of the in-the­
money put. 
Example: XYZ is at 49 and the following prices exist: 
XYZ, 49; 
XYZ July 45 put, l; and 
XYZ July 50 put, 3. 
If the underlying stock were to drop to 40 by expiration, the July 45 put would be 
worth 5 points, a 400% profit. The July 50 put would be worth 10 points, a 233% 
profit over its initial purchase price of 3. Thus, in a substantial downward move, the 
out-of-the-money put purchase provides higher reward potential. However, if the 
underlying stock drops only moderately, say to t:15, the purchaser of the July 45 put 
would lose his entire investment, since the put would be worthless at expiration. The 
purchaser of the in-the-money July 50 put would have a 2-point profit with XYZ at 
45 at expiration. 
The preceding analysis is based on holding the put until expiration. For the 
option buyer, this is generally an erroneous form of analysis, because the buyer 
generally tends to liquidate his option purchase in advance of expiration. When 
considering what happens to the put option in advance of expiration, it is helpful to 
remember that an in-the-money put tends to lose its time premium rather quickly. 
In the example above, the July 45 put is completely composed of time value pre­
mium. If the underlying stock begins to drop below 45, the price of the put will not 
increase as rapidly as would the price of a call that is going into-the-money. 
Example: If XYZ fell by 5 points to 44, definitely a move in the put buyer's favor, he 
may fmd that the July 45 put has increased in value only to 2 or 2½ points. This is 
somewhat disappointing because, with call options, one would expect to do signifi­
cantly better on a 5-point stock movement in his favor. Thus, when purchasing put 
options for speculation, it is generally best to concentrate on in-the-rrwney puts unless 
a very substantial decline in the price of the underlying stock is anticipated. 
Once the put option is in-the-money, the time value premium will decrease 
even in the longer-term series. Since this time premium is small in all series, the put 

===== PDF PAGE 288 =====
260 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
buyer can often purchase a longer-term option for very little extra money, thus gain­
ing more time to work with. Call option buyers are generally forced to avoid the 
longer-term series because the extra cost is not worth the risk involved, especially in 
a trading situation. However, the put buyer does not necessarily have this disadvan­
tage. If he can purchase the longer-term put for nearly the same price as the near­
term put, he should do so in case the underlying stock takes longer to drop than he 
had originally anticipated it would. 
It is not uncommon to see such prices as the following: 
XYZ common, 46: 
XYZ April 50 put, 4; 
XYZ July 50 put, 4½; and 
XYZ October 50 put, 5. 
None of these three puts have much time value premium in their prices. Thus, the 
buyer might be willing to spend the extra 1 point and buy the longest-term put. If the 
underlying stock should drop in price immediately, he will profit, but not as much as 
if he had bought one of the less expensive puts. However, should the underlying stock 
rise in price, he will own the longest-term put and will therefore suffer less of a loss, 
percentagewise. If the underlying stock rises in price, some amount of time value 
premium will come back into the various puts, and the longest-term put will have the 
largest amount of time premium. For example, if the stock rises back to 50, the fol­
lowing prices might exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
XYZ April 50 put, l; 
XYZ July 50 put, 2½; and 
XYZ October 50 put, 3½. 
The purchase of the longer-term October 50 put would have suffered the least loss, 
percentagewise, in this event. Consequently, when one is purchasing an in-the­
money put, he may often want to consider buying the longest-term put if the time 
value premium is small when compared to the time premium in the nearer-term 
puts. 
In Chapter 3, the delta of an option was described as the amount by which one 
might expect the option will increase or decrease in price if the underlying stock 
moves by a fixed amount (generally considered to be one point, for simplicity). Thus, 
if XYZ is at 49 and a call option is priced at 3 with a delta of ½, one would expect the 
call to sell for 3½ with XYZ at 50 and to sell at 2¼ with XYZ at 48. In reality, the delta 

===== PDF PAGE 289 =====
O.,ter 16: Put Option Buying 261 
changes even on a fractional move in the underlying stock, but one generally assumes 
that it will hold true for a 1-point move. Obviously, put options have deltas as well. The 
delta of a put is a negative number, reflecting the fact that the put price and the stock 
price are inversely related. As an approximation, one could say that the delta of the 
ctill option minus the delta of the put option with the same terms is equal to 1. That is, 
Delta of put = Delta of call - 1. 
This is an approximation and is accurate unless the put is deeply in-the-money. It has 
already been pointed out that the time value premium behavior of puts and calls is 
different, so it is inaccurate to assume that this formula holds true exactly for all 
cases. 
The delta of a put ranges between O and minus 1. If a July 50 put has a delta of 
-½, and the underlying stock rises by 1 point, the put will lose ½ point. The delta of 
a deeply out-of-the-money put is close to zero. The put's delta would decrease slow­
ly at first as the stock declined in value, then would begin to decrease much more 
rapidly as the stock fell through the striking price, and would reach a value of minus 
1 (the minimum) as the stock fell only moderately below the striking price. This is 
reflective of the fact that an out-of-the-money put tends to hold time premium quite 
well and an in-the-money put comes to parity rather quickly. 
RANKING PROSPECTIVE PUT PURCHASES 
In Chapter 3, a method of ranking prospective call purchases was developed that 
encompassed certain factors, such as the volatility of the underlying stock and the 
expected holding period of the purchased option. The same sort of analysis should be 
applied to put option purchases. 
The steps are summarized below. The reader may refer to the section titled 
"Advanced Selection Criteria" in Chapter 3 for a more detailed description of why 
this method of ranking is superior. 
1. Assume that each underlying stock can decrease in price in accordance with its 
volatility over a fixed holding period (30, 60, or 90 days). 
2. Estimate the put option prices after the decrease. 
3. Rank all potential put purchases by the highest reward opportunity for aggressive 
purchases. 
4. Estimate how much would be lost if the underlying stock instead rose in accor­
dance with its volatility, and rank all potential put purchases by best risk/reward 
ratio for a more conservative list of put purchases. 

===== PDF PAGE 290 =====
262 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
As was stated earlier, it is necessary to have a computer to make an accurate analysis 
of all listed options. The average customer is forced to obtain such data from a bro­
kerage firm or data service. He should be sure that the list he is using conforms to 
the above-mentioned criteria. If the data service is ranking option purchases by how 
well the puts would do if each underlying stock fell by a fixed percentage (such as 5% 
or 10%), the list should be rejected because it is not incorporating the volatility of the 
underlying stock into its analysis. Also, if the list is based on holding the put purchase 
until expiration, the list should be rejected as well, because this is not a realistic 
assumption. There are enough reliable and sophisticated data services that one 
should not have to work with inferior analyses in today's option market. 
For those readers who are more mathematically advanced and have the com­
puter capability to construct their own analyses, the details of implementing an analy­
sis similar to the one described above are presented in Chapter 28, Mathematical 
Applications. An application of put purchases, combined with fixed-income securi­
ties, is described in Chapter 26, Buying Options and Treasury Bills. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
The put buyer can take advantage of strategies that are very similar to those the call 
buyer uses for follow-up action, either to lock in profits or to attempt to improve a 
losing situation. Before discussing these specific strategies, it should be stated again 
that it is rarely to the option buyer's benefit to exercise the option in order to liqui­
date. This precludes, of course, those situations in which the call buyer actually wants 
to own the stock or the put buyer actually wants to sell the stock. If, however, the 
option holder is merely looking to liquidate his position, the cost of stock commis­
sions makes exercising a prohibitive move. This is true even ifhe has to accept a price 
that is a slight discount from parity when he sells his option. 
LOCKING IN PROFITS 
The reader may recall that there were four strategies (perhaps "tactics" is a better 
word) for the call buyer with an unrealized profit. These same four tactics can be 
used with only slight variations by the put option buyer. Additionally, a fifth strategy 
can be employed when a stock has both listed puts and calls. 
After an underlying stock has moved down and the put buyer has a relatively 
substantial unrealized gain, he might consider taking one of the following actions: 
1. Sell the put and liquidate the position for a profit. 
2. Do nothing and continue to hold the put. 

===== PDF PAGE 291 =====
O.,,er 16: Put Option Buying 263 
3, Sell the in-the-money long put and use part of the proceeds to purchase out-of­
the-money puts. 
4. Create a spread by selling an out-of-the-money put against the one he currently 
holds. 
These are the same four tactics that were discussed earlier with respect to call buy­
ing. In the fifth tactic, the holder of a listed put who has an unrealized profit might 
consider buying a listed call to protect his position. 
Example: A speculator originally purchased an XYZ October 50 put for 2 points when 
the stock was 52. If the stock has now fallen to 45, the put might be worth 6 points, 
representing an unrealized gain of 4 points and placing the put buyer in a position to 
implement one of these five tactics. After some time has passed, with the stock at 45, 
an at-the-money October 45 put might be selling for 2 points. Table 16-3 summarizes 
the situation. If the trader merely liquidates his position by selling out the October 50 
put, he would realize a profit of 4 points. Since he is terminating the position, he can 
make neither more nor less than 4 points. This is the most conservative of the tactics, 
allowing no additional room for appreciation, but also eliminating any chance of los­
ing the accumulated profits. 
TABLE 16-3. 
Background table for profit alternatives. 
Original Trade Current Prices 
XYZ common: 52 XYZ common: 45 
Bought XYZ October 50 put at 2 XYZ October 50 put: 6 
XYZ October 45 put: 2 
If the trader does nothing, merely continuing to hold the October 50 put, he is 
taking an aggressive action. If the stock should reverse and rise back above 50 by 
expiration, he would lose everything. However, if the stock continues to fall, he could 
build up substantially larger profits. This is the only tactic that could eventually result 
in a loss at expiration. 
These two simple strategies - liquidating or doing nothing are the easiest 
alternatives. The remaining strategies allow one to attempt to achieve a balance 
between retaining built-up profits and generating even more profits. The third tactic 
that the speculator could use would be to sell the put that he is currently holding and 

===== PDF PAGE 292 =====
264 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
use some of the proceeds to purchase the October 45 put. The general idea in this 
tactic is to pull one's initial investment out of the market and then to increase the 
number of option contracts held by buying the out-of-the-money option. 
Example: The trader would receive 6 points from the sale of the October 50 put. He 
should take 2 points of this amount and put it back into his pocket, thus covering his 
initial investment. Then he could buy 2 October 45 puts at 2 points each with the 
remaining portion of the proceeds from the sale. He has no risk at expiration with this 
strategy, since he has recovered his initial investment. Moreover, if the underlying 
stock should continue to fall rapidly, he could profit handsomely because he has 
increased the number of put contracts that he holds. 
The fourth choice that the put holder has is to create a spread by selling the 
October 45 put against the October 50 that he currently holds. This would create a 
bear spread, technically. This type of spread is described in more detail later. For the 
time being, it is sufficient to understand what happens to the trader's risks and 
rewards by creating this spread. The sale of the October 45 put brings in 2 points, 
which covers the initial 2-point purchase cost of the October 50 put. Thus, his "cost" 
for this spread is nothing; he has no risk, except for commissions. If the underlying 
stock should rise above 50 by expiration, all the puts would expire worthless. (A put 
expires worthless when the underlying stock is above the striking price at expiration.) 
This would represent the worst case; he would recover nothing from the spread. If 
the stock should be below 45 at expiration, he would realize the maximum potential 
of the spread, which is 5 points. That is, no matter how far XYZ is below 45 at expi­
ration, the October 50 put will be worth 5 points more than the October 45 put, and 
the spread could thus be liquidated for 5 points. His maximum profit potential in the 
spread situation is 5 points. This tactic would be the best one if the underlying stock 
stabilized near 45 until expiration. 
To analyze the fifth strategy that the put holder could use, it is necessary to 
introduce a call option into the picture. 
Example: With XYZ at 45, there is an October 45 call selling for 3 points. The put 
holder could buy this call in order to limit his risk and still retain the potential for 
large future profits. If the trader buys the call, he will have the following position: 
Long l October 50 put C b' d t 5 . t 
l O b 5 all - om me cos : porn s Long cto er 4 c 
The total combined cost of this put and call combination is 5 points - 2 points were 
originally paid for the put, and now 3 points have been paid for the call. No matter 
where the underlying stock is at expiration, this combination will be worth at least 5 

===== PDF PAGE 293 =====
Gapter 16: Put Option Buying 265 
points. For example, if XYZ is at 46 at expiration, the put will be worth 4 and the call 
worth l; or if XYZ is at 48, the put will be worth 2 and the call worth 3. If the stock 
is above 50 or below 45 at expiration, the combination will be worth more than 5 
points. Thus, the trader has no risk in this combination, since he has paid 5 points for 
it and will be able to sell it for at least 5 points at expiration. In fact, if the underly­
ing stock continues to drop, the put will become more valuable and he could build 
up substantial profits. Moreover, if the underlying stock should reverse direction and 
climb substantially, he could still profit, because the call will then become valuable. 
This tactic is the best one to use if the underlying stock does not stabilize near 45, 
but instead makes a relatively dramatic move either up or down by expiration. The 
strategy of simultaneously owning both a put and a call is discussed in much greater 
detail in Chapter 23. It is introduced here merely for the purposes of the put buyer 
wanting to obtain protection of his unrealized profits. 
Each of these five strategies may work out to be the best one under a different 
set of circumstances. The ultimate result of each tactic is dependent on the direction 
that XYZ moves in the future. As was the case with call options, the spread tactic 
never turns out to be the worst tactic, although it is the best one only if the underly­
ing stock stabilizes. Tables 16-4 and 16-5 summarize the results the speculator could 
expect from invoking each of these five tactics. The tactics are: 
1. Liquidate - sell the long put for a profit and do not reinvest. 
2. Do nothing - continue to hold the long put. 
3. "Roll down" - sell the long put, pocket the initial investment, and invest the 
remaining proceeds in out-of-the-money puts at a lower strike. 
4. "Spread" - create a spread by selling the out-of-the-money put against the put 
already held. 
5. "Combine" create a combination by buying a call at a lower strike while con­
tinuing to hold the put. 
TABLE 16-4. 
Comparison of the five tactics. 
By expiration, if XYZ ... 
Continues to fall dramatically 
Falls moderately further 
Remains relatively unchanged 
Rises moderately 
Rises substantially 
the best strategy was ... 
"Roll down" 
Do nothing 
Spread 
Liquidate 
Combine 
and the worst 
strategy was ... 
Liquidate 
Combine 
Combine or "roll down" 
"Roll down" or do nothing 
Do nothing 

===== PDF PAGE 294 =====
266 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
TABLE 16-5. 
Results of adopting each of the five tactics. 
XYZ Price at "Roll Down" Do-Nothing Spread Liquidate Combine 
Expiration Profit Profit Profit Profit Profit 
30 + $3,000 (8) +$1,800 +$500 +$400 (W) +$1,500 
35 + 2,000 (8) + 1,300 + 500 + 400 (W) + 1,000 
41 + 800 (8) + 700 + 500 + 400 (W) + 400 
42 + 600 (8) + 600 (8) + 500 + 400 + 300 (W) 
43 + 400 + 500 (8) + 500 (8) + 400 + 200 (W) 
45 0(W) + 300 + 500 (8) + 400 0(W) 
46 0(W) + 200 + 400 (8) + 400 (8) O(W) 
48 0(W) 0(W) + 200 + 400 (8) 0(W) 
50 0 200 (W) 0 + 400 (8) 0 
54 0 200 (W) 0 + 400 (8) + 400 (8) 
60 0 200 (W) 0 + 400 + 1,000 (8) 
Note that each tactic is the best one under one of the scenarios, but that the spread 
tactic is never the worst of the five. The actual results of each tactic, using the figures 
from the example above, are depicted in Table 16-5, where B denotes best tactic and 
W denotes worst one. 
All the strategies are profitable if the underlying stock continues to fall dramat­
ically, although the "roll down," "do nothing," and combinations work out best, 
because they continue to accrue profits if the stock continues to fall. If the underly­
ing stock rises instead, only the combination outdistances the simplest tactic of all, 
liquidation. 
If the underlying stock stabilizes, the "do-nothing" and "spread" tactics work out 
best. It would generally appear that the combination tactic or the "roll-down" tactic 
would be the most attractive, since neither one has any risk and both could generate 
large profits if the stock moved substantially. The advantage for the spread was sub­
stantial in call options, but in the case of puts, the premium received for the out-of­
the-money put is not as large, and therefore the spread strategy loses some of its 
attractiveness. Finally, any of these tactics could be applied partially; for example, one 
could sell out half of a profitable long position in order to take some profits, and con­
tinue to hold the remainder. 

===== PDF PAGE 295 =====
Cl,opter 16:PutOptionBuying 
LOSS-LIMITING ACTIONS 
267 
The foregoing discussion concentrated on how the put holder could retain or 
increase his profit. However, it is often the case in option buying that the holder of 
the option is faced with an unrealized loss. The put holder may also have several 
choices of action to take in this case. His first, and simplest, course of action would 
be to sell the put and take his loss. Although this is advisable in certain cases, espe­
cially when the underlying stock seems to have assumed a distinctly bullish stance, it 
is not always the wisest thing to do. The put holder who has a loss may also consider 
either "rolling up" to create a bearish spread or entering into a calendar spread. 
Either of these actions could help him recover part or all of his loss. 
THE "ROLLING-UP" STRATEGY 
The reader may recall that a similar action to "rolling up," termed "rolling down," was 
available for call options held at a loss and was described in Chapter 3. The put buyer 
who owns a put at a loss may be able to create a spread that allows him to break even 
at a more favorable price at expiration. Such action will inevitably limit his profit 
potential, but is generally useful in recovering something from a put that might oth­
erwise expire totally worthless. 
Example: An investor initially purchases an XYZ October 45 put for 3 points when 
the underlying stock is at 45. However, the stock rises to 48 at a later date and the 
put that was originally bought for 3 points is now selling for 1 ¼ points. It is not 
unusual, by the way, for a put to retain this much of its value even though the stock 
has moved up and some amount of time has passed, since out-of-the-money puts 
tend to hold time value premium rather well. With XYZ at 48, an October 50 put 
might be selling for 3 points. The put holder could create a position designed to per­
mit recovery of some of his losses by selling two of the puts that he is long - October 
45's - and simultaneously buying one October 50 put. The net cost for this transac­
tion would be only commissions, since he receives $300 from selling two puts at 1 ¼ 
each, which completely covers the $300 cost of buying the October 50 put. The 
transactions are summarized in Table 16-6. 
By selling 2 of the October 45 puts, the investor is now short an October 45 put. 
Since he also purchased an October 50 put, he has a spread ( technically, a bear 
spread). He has spent no additional money, except commissions, to set up this spread, 
since the sale of the October 45's covered the purchase of the October 50 put. This 
strategy is most attractive when the debit involved to create the spread is small. In 
this example, the debit is zero. 

===== PDF PAGE 296 =====
268 
TABLE 16-6. 
Summary of rolling-up transactions. 
Original trade: 
Later: 
Net position: 
Buy 1 October 45 put for 3 
with XYZ at 45 
With XYZ at 48, sell 2 
October 45's for 11/2 each 
and buy l October 50 put for 3 
Long 1 October 50 put 
Short 1 October 45 put 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
$300 debit 
$300 credit 
$300 debit 
$300 debit 
The effect of creating this spread is that the investor has not increased his risk 
at all, but has raised the break-even point for his position. That is, if XYZ merely falls 
a small distance, he will be able to get out even. Without the effect of creating the 
spread, the put holder would need XYZ to fall back to 42 at expiration in order for 
him to break even, since he originally paid 3 points for the October 45 put. His orig­
inal risk was $300. IfXYZ continues to rise in price and the puts in the spread expire 
worthless, the net loss will still be only $300 plus additional commissions. Admittedly, 
the commissions for the spread will increase the loss slightly, but they are small in 
comparison to the debit of the position ($300). On the other hand, if the stock should 
fall back only slightly, to 47 by expiration, the spread will break even. At expiration, 
with XYZ at 47, the in-the-money October 50 put will be worth 3 points and the out­
of-the-money October 45 put will expire worthless. Thus, the investor will recover his 
$300 cost, except for commissions, with XYZ at 47 at expiration. His break-even point 
is raised from 42 to 47, a substantial improvement of his chances for recovery. 
The implementation of this spread strategy reduces the profit potential of the 
position, however. The maximum potential of the spread is 2 points. If XYZ is any­
where below 45 at expiration, the spread will be worth 5 points, since the October 50 
put will sell for 5 points more than the October 45 put. The investor has limited his 
potential profit to 2 points - the 5-point maximum width of the spread, less the 3 
points that he paid to get into the position. He can no longer gain substantially on a 
large drop in price by the underlying stock. This is normally of little concern to the 
put holder faced with an unrealized loss and the potential for a total loss. He gener­
ally would be appreciative of getting out even or of making a small profit. The cre­
ation of the spread accomplishes this objective for him. 
It should also be pointed out that he does not incur the maximum loss of his 
entire debit plus commissions, unless XYZ closes above 50 at expiration. If XYZ is 

===== PDF PAGE 297 =====
O,apter 16: Put Option Buying 269 
anywhere below 50, the October 50 will have some value and the investor will be able 
to recover something from the position. This is distinctly different from the original 
put holding of the October 45, whereby the maximum loss would be incurred unless 
the stock were below 45 at expiration. Thus, the introduction of the spread also 
reduces the chances of having to realize the maximum loss. 
In summary, the put holder faced with an unrealized loss may be able to create 
a spread by selling twice the number of puts that he is currently long and simultane­
ously buying the put at the next higher strike. This action should be used only if the 
spread can be transacted at a small debit or, preferably, at even money (zero debit). 
The spread position offers a much better chance of breaking even and also reduces 
the possibility of having to realize the maximum loss in the position. However, the 
introduction of these loss-limiting measures reduces the maximum potential of the 
position if the underlying stock should subsequently decline in price by a significant 
amount. Using this spread strategy for puts would require a margin account, just as 
calls do. 
THE CALENDAR SPREAD STRATEGY 
Another strategy is sometimes available to the put holder who has an unrealized loss. 
If the put that he is holding has an intermediate-term or long-term expiration date, 
he might be able to create a calendar spread by selling the near-term put against the 
put that he currently holds. 
Example: An investor bought an XYZ October 45 put for 3 points when the stock was 
at 45. The stock rises to 48, moving in the wrong direction for the put buyer, and his 
put falls in value to 1 ½. He might, at that time, consider selling the near-term July 
45 put for 1 point. The ideal situation would be for the July 45 put to expire worth­
less, reducing the cost of his long put by 1 point. Then, if the underlying stock 
declined below 45, he could profit after July expiration. 
The major drawback to this strategy is that little or no profit will be made - in 
fact, a loss is quite possible - if the underlying stock falls back to 45 or below before 
the near-term July option expires. Puts display different qualities in their time value 
premiums than calls do, as has been noted before. With the stock at 45, the differ­
ential between the July 45 put and the October 45 put might not widen much at all. 
This would mean that the spread has not gained anything, and the spreader has a loss 
equal to his commissions plus the initial unrealized loss. In the example above, ifXYZ 
dropped quickly back to 45, the July 45 might be worth 1 ½ and the October worth 
2½. At this point, the spreader would have a loss on both sides of his spread: He sold 
the July 45 put for 1 and it is now 1 ½; he bought the October 45 for 3 and it is now 

===== PDF PAGE 298 =====
270 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
2½; plus he has spent two commissions to date and would have to spend two more 
to liquidate the position. 
At this point, the strategist may decide to do nothing and take his chances that 
the stock will subsequently rally so that the July 45 put will expire worthless. 
However, if the stock continues to decline below 45, the spread will most certainly 
become more of a loss as both puts come closer to parity. 
This type of spread strategy is not as attractive as the "rolling-up" strategy. In 
the "rolling-up" strategy, one is not subjected to a loss if the stock declines after the 
spread is established, although he does limit his profits. The fact that the calendar 
spread strategy can lead to a loss even if the stock declines makes it a less desirable 
alternative. 
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS 
Before considering other put-oriented strategies, the reader should understand the 
definition of an equivalent position. Two strategies, or positions, are equivalent when 
they have the same profit potential. They may have different collateral or investment 
requirements, but they have similar profit potentials. Many of the call-oriented 
strategies that were discussed in Part II of the book have an equivalent put strategy. 
One such case has already been described: The "protected short sale," or shorting the 
common stock and buying a call, is equivalent to the purchase of a put. That is, both 
have a limited risk above the striking price of the option and relatively large profit 
potential to the downside. An easy way to tell if two strategies are equivalent is to see 
if their profit graphs have the same shape. The put purchase and the "protected short 
sale" have profit graphs with exactly the same shape (Figures 16-1 and 4-1, respec­
tively). As more put strategies are discussed, it will always be mentioned if the put 
strategy is equivalent to a previously described call strategy. This may help to clarify 
the put strategies, which understandably may seem complex to the reader who is not 
familiar with put options. 

===== PDF PAGE 299 =====
Put Buying in Conjunction 
with Com.m.on Stock 
Ownership 
Another useful feature of put options, in addition to their speculative leverage in a 
downward move by the underlying stock, is that the put purchase can be used to limit 
downside loss in a stock that is owned. When one simultaneously owns both the com­
mon stock and a put on that same stock, he has a position with limited downside risk 
during the life of the put. This position is also called a synthetic long call, because the 
profit graph is the same shape as a long call's. 
Example: An investor owns XYZ stock, which is at 52, and purchases an XYZ October 
50 put for 2. The put gives him the right to sell XYZ at 50, so the most that the stock­
holder can lose on his stock is 2 points. Since he pays 2 points for the put protection, his 
maximum potential loss until October expiration is 4 points, no matter how far XYZ 
might decline up until that time. If, on the other hand, the price of the stock should 
move up by October, the investor would realize any gain in the stock, less the 2 points 
that he paid for the put protection. The put functions much like an insurance policy with 
a finite life. Table 17-1 and Figure 17-1 depict the results at October expiration for this 
position: buying the October 50 put for 2 points to protect a holding in XYZ common 
stock, which is selling at 52. The dashed line on the graph represents the profit poten­
tial of the common stock ownership by itself. Notice that if the stock were below 48 in 
October, the common stock owner would have been better off buying the put. However, 
with XYZ above 48 at expiration, the put purchase was a burden that cost a small por­
tion of potential profits. This strategy, however, is not necessarily geared to maximizing 
211 

===== PDF PAGE 300 =====
272 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
TABLE 17-1. 
Results at expiration on a protected stock holding. 
XYZ Price at Stock Put 
Expiration Profit Profit 
30 -$2,200 +$1,800 
40 - 1,200 + 800 
50 200 200 
54 + 200 200 
60 + 800 200 
70 + 1,800 200 
80 + 2,800 200 
FIGURE 17-1. 
long common stock and long put. 
C: 
0 
e ·5. 
X 
w 
1i'i $0 Cf) 
Cf) 
0 ..J 
c5 
e 
0. 
-$400 
, 
, , , 
Long ,' 
Stock ,, 
,, ,, 
, , , 
48 50 ,'52 
, ,, , 
,, , 
, 
, ,, , 
, , ,, 
Stock Price at Expiration 
,, ,, 
,, ,, 
, , 
Total 
Profit 
-$ 400 
400 
400 
0 
+ 600 
+ 1,600 
+ 2,600 
one's profit potential on the common stock, but rather provides the stock owner with 
protection, eliminating the possibility of any devastating loss on the stock holding during 
the life of the put. In all the put buying strategies discussed in this chapter and Chapter 
18, the put must be paid for in full. That is the only increase in investment. 
Although any common stockholder may use this strategy, two general classes of 
stock owners find it particularly attractive: First, the long-term holder of the stock 
who is not considering selling the stock may utilize the put protection to limit losses 
over a short-term horizon. Second, the buyer of common stock who wants some 
"insurance" in case he is wrong may also find the put protection attractive. 

===== PDF PAGE 301 =====
Cl,apter 17: Put Buying in Conjunction with Common Stock Ownership 273 
The long-term holder who strongly feels that his stock will drop should proba­
bly sell that stock. However, his cost basis may make the capital gains tax on the sale 
prohibitive. He also may not be entirely sure that the stock will decline - and may 
want to continue to hold the stock in case it does go up. In either case, the purchase 
of a put will limit the stockholder's downside risk while still allowing room for upside 
appreciation. A large number of individual and institutional investors have holdings 
that they might find difficult to sell for one reason or another. The purchase of a low­
cost put can often reduce the negative effects of a bear market on their holdings. 
The second general class of put buyers for protection includes the investor who 
is establishing a position in the stock. He might want to buy a put at the same time 
that he buys the stock, thereby creating a position with profitability as depicted in the 
previous profit graph. He immediately starts out with a position that has limited 
downside risk with large potential profits if the stock moves up. In this way, he can 
feel free to hold the stock during the life of the put without worrying about when to 
sell it if it should experience a temporary setback. Some fairly aggressive stock traders 
use this technique because it eliminates the necessity of having to place a stop loss 
order on the stock. It is often frustrating to see a stock fall and touch off one's stop 
loss limit order, only to subsequently rise in price.' The stock owner who has a put for 
protection need not overreact to a downward move. He can afford to sit back and 
wait during the life of the put, since he has built-in protection. 
WHICH PUT TO BUY 
The selection of which put the stock owner purchases will determine how much of 
his profit potential he is giving up and how much risk he is limiting. An out-of-the­
money put will cost very little. Therefore, it will be less of a hindrance on profit 
potential if the underlying stock rises in price. Unfortunately, the put's protective fea­
ture is small until the stock falls to the striking price of the put. Therefore, the pur­
chase of the out-ofthe-rrwney put will not provide as much downside protection as 
an at- or in-the-money put would. The purchase of a deeply out-of-the-money put as 
protection is more like "disaster insurance": It will prevent a stock owner from expe­
riencing a disaster in terms of a downside loss during the life of the put, but will not 
provide much protection in the case of a limited stock decline. 
Example: XYZ is at 40 and the October 35 put is selling for ½. The purchase of this 
put as protection for the common stock would not reduce upside potential much at 
all, only by ½ point. However, the stock owner could lose 5½ points if XYZ fell to 35 
or below. That is his maximum possible loss, for if XYZ were below 35 at October expi­
ration, he could exercise his put to sell the stock at 35, losing 5 points on the stock, and 
he would have paid ½ point for the put, bringing his total loss to 5½ points. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 17 | PDF PAGES 302-312 =====

===== PDF PAGE 302 =====
274 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
At the opposite end of the spectrum, the stock owner might buy an in-the­
money put as protection. This would quite severely limit his profit potential, since the 
underlying stock would have to rise above the strike and more for him to make a 
profit. However, the in-the-money put provides vast quantities of downside protec­
tion, limiting his loss to a very small amount. 
Example: XYZ is again at 40 and there is an October 45 put selling for 5½. The stock 
owner who purchases the October 45 put would have a maximum risk of½ point, for 
he could always exercise the put to sell stock at 45, giving him a 5-point gain on the 
stock, but he paid 5½ points for the put, thereby giving him an overall maximum loss 
of ½ point. He would have difficulty making any profit during the life of the put, 
however. XYZ would have to rise by more than 5½ points (the cost of the put) for 
him to make any total profit on the position by October expiration. 
The deep in-the-money put purchase is overly conservative and is usually not a 
good strategy. On the other hand, it is not wise to purchase a put that is too deeply 
out-of-the-money as protection. Generally, one should purchase a slightly out-ofthe­
money put as protection. This helps to achieve a balance between the positive feature 
of protection for the common stock and the negative feature of limiting profits. 
The reader may find it interesting to know that he has actually gone through this 
analysis, back in Chapter 3. Glance again at the profit graph for this strategy of using 
the put purchase to protect a common stock holding (Figure 17-1). It has exactly the 
same shape as the profit graph of a simple call purchase. Therefore, the call purchase 
and the long put/long stock strategies are equivalent. Again, by equivalent it is meant 
that they have similar profit potentials. Obviously, the ownership of a call differs sub­
stantially from the ownership of common stock and a put. The stock owner continues 
to maintain his position for an indefinite period of time, while the call holder does not. 
Also, the stockholder is forced to pay substantially more for his position than is the call 
holder, and he also receives dividends whereas the call holder does not. Therefore, 
"equivalent" does not mean exactly the same when comparing call-oriented and put­
oriented strategies, but rather denotes that they have similar profit potentials. 
In Chapter 3, it was determined that the slightly in-the-money call often offers 
the best ratio between risk and reward. When the call is slightly in-the-money, the 
stock is above the striking price. Similarly, the slightly out-of-the-money put often 
offers the best ratio between risk and reward for the common stockholder who is buy­
ing the put for protection. Again, the stock is slightly above the striking price. Actually, 
since the two positions are equivalent, the same conclusions should be arrived at; that 
is why it was stated that the reader has been through this analysis previously. 

===== PDF PAGE 303 =====
G,pter 17: Put Buying in Conjunction with Common Stock Ownership 
TAX CONSIDERATIONS 
275 
Although tax considerations are covered in detail in a later chapter, an important tax 
law concerning the purchase of puts against a common stock holding should be men­
tioned at this time. If the stock owner is already a long-term holder of the stock at the 
time that he buys the put, the put purchase has no effect on his tax status. Similarly, 
if the stock buyer buys the stock at the time that he buys the put and identifies the 
position as a hedge, there is no effect on the tax status of his stock. However, if one 
Is currently a short-tenn holder of the common stock at the time that he buys a put, 
he eliminates any accrued holding period on his common stock. Moreover, the hold­
ing period for that stock does not begin again until the put is sold. 
Example: Assume the long-term holding period is 6 months. That is, a stock owner 
must own the stock for 6 months before it can be considered a long-term capital gain. 
An investor who bought the stock and held it for 5 months and then purchased a put 
would wipe out his entire holding period of 5 months. Suppose he then held the put 
and the stock simultaneously for 6 months, liquidating the put at the end of 6 months. 
His holding period would start all over again for that common stock. Even though he 
has owned the stock for 11 months - 5 months prior to the put purchase and 6 
months more while he simultaneously owned the put - his holding period for tax pur­
poses is considered to be zero! 
This law could have important tax ramifications, and one should consult a tax advisor 
if he is in doubt as to the effect that a put purchase might have on the taxability of 
his common stock holdings. 
PUT BUYING AS PROTECTION FOR THE COVERED CALL WRITER 
Since put purchases afford protection to the owner of common stock, some investors 
naturally feel that the same protective feature could be used to limit their downside 
risk in the covered call writing strategy. Recall that the covered call writing strategy 
involves the purchase of stock and the sale of a call option against that stock. The cov­
ered write has limited upside profit potential and offers protection to the downside in 
the amount of the call premium. The covered writer will make money if the stock falls 
a little, remains unchanged, or rises by expiration. The covered writer can actually lose 
money only if the stock falls by more than the call premium received. He has poten­
tially large downside losses. This strategy is known as a protective collar or, more sim­
ply, a "collar." (It is also called a "hedge wrapper," although that is an outdated term.) 

===== PDF PAGE 304 =====
274 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
At the opposite end of the spectrum, the stock owner might buy an in-the­
money put as protection. This would quite severely limit his profit potential, since the 
underlying stock would have to rise above the stiike and more for him to make a 
profit. However, the in-the-money put provides vast quantities of downside protec­
tion, limiting his loss to a very small amount. 
Example: XYZ is again at 40 and there is an October 45 put selling for 5½. The stock 
owner who purchases the October 45 put would have a maximum risk of½ point, for 
he could always exercise the put to sell stock at 45, giving him a 5-point gain on the 
stock, but he paid 5½ points for the put, thereby giving him an overall maximum loss 
of ½ point. He would have difficulty making any profit during the life of the put, 
however. XYZ would have to rise by more than 5½ points (the cost of the put) for 
him to make any total profit on the position by October expiration. 
The deep in-the-money put purchase is overly conservative and is usually not a 
good strategy. On the other hand, it is not wise to purchase a put that is too deeply 
out-of-the-money as protection. Generally, one should purchase a slightly out-ofthe­
nwney put as protection. This helps to achieve a balance between the positive feature 
of protection for the common stock and the negative feature of limiting profits. 
The reader may find it interesting to know that he has actually gone through this 
analysis, back in Chapter 3. Glance again at the profit graph for this strategy of using 
the put purchase to protect a common stock holding (Figure 17-1). It has exactly the 
same shape as the profit graph of a simple call purchase. Therefore, the call purchase 
and the long put/long stock strategies are equivalent. Again, by equivalent it is meant 
that they have similar profit potentials. Obviously, the ovvnership of a call differs sub­
stantially from the ownership of common stock and a put. The stock owner continues 
to maintain his position for an indefinite period of time, while the call holder does not. 
Also, the stockholder is forced to pay substantially more for his position than is the call 
holder, and he also receives dividends whereas the call holder does not. Therefore, 
"equivalent" does not mean exactly the same when comparing call-oriented and put­
oriented strategies, but rather denotes that they have similar profit potentials. 
In Chapter 3, it was determined that the slightly in-the-money call often offers 
the best ratio between 1isk and reward. When the call is slightly in-the-money, the 
stock is above the striking price. Similarly, the slightly out-of-the-money put often 
offers the best ratio between risk and reward for the common stockholder who is buy­
ing the put for protection. Again, the stock is slightly above the striking price. Actually, 
since the two positions are equivalent, the same conclusions should be arrived at; that 
is why it was stated that the reader has been through this analysis previously. 

===== PDF PAGE 305 =====
0.,,,,, I 7: Put Buying in Conjundion with Common Stock Ownership 
JAX CONSIDERATIONS 
275 
Although tax considerations are covered in detail in a later chapter, an important tax 
law concerning the purchase of puts against a common stock holding should be men­
tioned at this time. If the stock owner is already a long-term holder of the stock at the 
time that he buys the put, the put purchase has no effect on his tax status. Similarly, 
if the stock buyer buys the stock at the time that he buys the put and identifies the 
position as a hedge, there is no effect on the tax status of his stock. However, if one 
is currently a short-term holder of the comrrwn stock at the time that he buys a put, 
he eliminates any accrued holding period on his comrrwn stock. Moreover, the hold­
ing period for that stock does not begin again until the put is sold. 
Example: Assume the long-term holding period is 6 months. That is, a stock owner 
must own the stock for 6 months before it can be considered a long-term capital gain. 
An investor who bought the stock and held it for 5 months and then purchased a put 
would wipe out his entire holding period of 5 months. Suppose he then held the put 
and the stock simultaneously for 6 months, liquidating the put at the end of 6 months. 
His holding period would start all over again for that common stock. Even though he 
has owned the stock for 11 months - 5 months prior to the put purchase and 6 
months more while he simultaneously owned the put - his holding period for tax pur­
poses is considered to be zero! 
This law could have important tax ramifications, and one should consult a tax advisor 
if he is in doubt as to the effect that a put purchase might have on the taxability of 
his common stock holdings. 
PUT BUYING AS PROTECTION FOR THE COVERED CALL WRITER 
Since put purchases afford protection to the owner of common stock, some investors 
naturally feel that the same protective feature could be used to limit their downside 
risk in the covered call writing strategy. Recall that the covered call writing strategy 
involves the purchase of stock and the sale of a call option against that stock. The cov­
ered write has limited upside profit potential and offers protection to the downside in 
the amount of the call premium. The covered writer will make money if the stock falls 
a little, remains unchanged, or rises by expiration. The covered writer can actually lose 
money only if the stock falls by more than the call premium received. He has poten­
tially large downside losses. This strategy is known as a protective collar or, more sim­
ply, a "collar." (It is also called a "hedge wrapper," although that is an outdated term.) 

===== PDF PAGE 306 =====
276 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
The purchase of an out-of the-money put option can eliminate the risk of large 
potential losses for the covered write, although the money spent for the put purchase 
will reduce the overall return from the covered write. One must therefore include 
the put cost in his initial calculations to determine if it is worthwhile to buy the put. 
Example: X'YZ is at 39 and there is an XYZ October 40 call selling for 3 points and an 
XYZ October 35 put selling for ½ point. A covered write could be established by buy­
ing the common at 39 and selling the October 40 call for 3. This covered write would 
have a maximum profit potential of 4 points if XYZ were anywhere above 40 at expi­
ration. The write would lose money if XYZ were anywhere below 36, the break-even 
point, at October expiration. By also purchasing the October 35 put at the time the 
covered write is initiated, the covered writer will limit his profit potential slightly, but 
will also greatly reduce his risk potential. If the put purchase is added to the covered 
write, the maximum profit potential is reduced to 3½ points at October expiration. The 
break-even point moves up to 36½, and the writer will experience some loss if XYZ is 
below 36½ at expiration. However, the most that the writer could lose would be 1 ¼ 
points if XYZ were below 35 at expiration. The purchase of the put option produces 
this loss-limiting effect. Table 17-2 and Figure 17-2 depict the profitability of both the 
regular covered write and the covered write that is protected by the put purchase. 
Commissions should be carefully included in the covered writer's return calcula­
tions, as well as the cost of the put. It was demonstrated in Chapter 2 that the covered 
writer must include all commissions and margin interest expenses as well as all divi­
dends received in order to produce an accurate "total return" picture of the covered 
write. Figure 17-2 shows that the break-even point is raised slightly and the overall prof­
it potential is reduced by the purchase of the put. However, the maximum risk is quite 
small and the writer need never be forced to roll down in a disadvantageous situation. 
Recall that the covered writer who does not have the protective put in place is 
forced to roll down in order to gain increased downside protection. Rolling down 
merely means that he buys back the call that is currently written and writes another 
call, with a lower striking price, in its place. This rolling-down action can be helpful 
if the stock stabilizes after falling; but if the stock reverses and climbs upward in price 
again, the covered writer who rolled down would have limited his gains. In fact, he 
may even have "locked in" a loss. The writer who has the protective put need not be 
bothered with such things. He never has to roll down, for he has a limited maximum 
loss. Therefore, he should never get into a "locked-in" loss situation. This can be a 
great advantage, especially from an emotional viewpoint, because the writer is never 
forced to make a decision as to the future price of the stock in the middle of the 
stock's decline. With the put in place, he can feel free to take no action at all, since 
his overall loss is limited. If the stock should rally upward later, he will still be in a 
position to make his maximum profit. 

===== PDF PAGE 307 =====
Chapter 17: Put Buying in Conjundion with Common Stock Ownership 
TABLE 17·2. 
Comparison of regular and protected covered writes. 
XYZ Price at Stock October 40 October 35 
Expiration Profit Call Profit Put Profit 
25 -$1,400 +$300 +$950 
30 900 + 300 + 450 
35 400 + 300 - 50 
36.50 250 + 300 - 50 
38 100 + 300 - 50 
40 + 100 + 300 - 50 
45 + 600 - 200 - 50 
50 + 1,100 - 700 - 50 
FIGURE 17-2. 
Covered call write protected by a put purchase. 
C 
0 
e ·5. 
X 
LU 
co $0 CJ) 
CJ) 
0 .J 
0 
~ -$150 a.. 
,, 
},.,,' 
; 
,, 
Regular 
Covered ,,' 
Write/ 
36 / , , 
;
,,' 
+$400 
,----------➔ ,,,' _____ ...,.. 
, +$350 
,,,' 
40 
Stock Price at Expiration 
277 
Total 
Profit 
-$150 
- 150 
- 150 
0 
+ 150 
+ 350 
+ 350 
+ 350 
The longer-term effects of buying puts in combination with covered writes are 
not easily definable, but it would appear that the writer reduces his overall rate of 
return slightly by buying the puts. This is because he gives something away if the 
stock falls slightly, remains unchanged, or rises in price. He only "gains" something if 
the stock falls heavily. Since the odds of a stock falling heavily are small in compari­
son to the other events (falling slightly, remaining unchanged, or rising), the writer 
will be gaining something in only a small percentage of cases. However, the put buy­
ing strategy may still prove useful in that it removes the emotional uncertainty of 

===== PDF PAGE 308 =====
278 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
large losses. The covered writer who buys puts may often find it easier to operate in 
a more rational manner when he has the protective put in place. 
This strategy is equivalent to one that has been described before, the bull 
spread. Notice that the profit graph in Figure 17-2 has the same shape as the bull 
spread profit graph (Figure 7-1). This means that the two strategies are equivalent. 
In fact, in Chapter 7 it was pointed out that the bull spread could sometimes be con­
sidered a "substitute" for covered writing. Actually, the bull spread is more akin to 
this strategy - the covered write protected by a put purchase. There are, of course, 
differences between the strategies. They are equivalent in profit and loss potential, 
but the covered writer could never lose all his investment in a short period of time, 
although the spreader could. In order to actually use bull spreads as substitutes for 
covered writes, one would invest only a small portion of his available funds in the 
spread and would place the remainder of his funds in fixed-income securities. That 
strategy was discussed in more depth in Chapter 7. 
NO-COST COLLARS 
The "collar" strategy is often arrived at in another manner: a stockholder begins 
to worry about the downside potential of the stock market and decides to buy puts 
on his stock as protection. However, he is dismayed by the cost of the puts and so he 
also considers the sale of calls. If he buys an out-of-the-money put, it is quite possi­
ble that he might be able to sell an out-of-the-money call whose proceeds complete­
ly cover the cost of the put. Thus, he has established a protective collar at no cost -
at least no debit. His "cost" is the fact that he has forsaken the upside profit poten­
tial on his stock, above the striking price of the written call. 
In fact, certain large institutional traders are able to transact collars through 
large over-the-counter option brokers, such as Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley. 
They might even give the broker instructions such as this: "I own XYZ and I want to 
buy a put 10 percent out of the money that expires in a year. What would the strik­
ing price of a one-year call have to be in order to create a no-cost collar?" The bro­
ker might then tell him that such a call would have to be struck 30 percent out of the 
money. The actual strike price of the call would depend on the volatility estimate for 
the underlying stock, as well as interest rates and dividends. These types of transac­
tions occur with a fair amount of frequency. 
Some very interesting situations can be created with long-term options. One of 
the most interesting occurred in 1999, when a company that owned 5 million shares 
of Cisco ( CSCO) decided it would like to hedge them by creating a no-cost collar 
over the next three years. At the time, CSCO was trading at about 130, and its volatil­
ity was about 50%. It turns out that a three-year put struck at 130 sells for about the 

===== PDF PAGE 309 =====
278 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
large losses. The covered writer who buys puts may often find it easier to operate in 
a more rational manner when he has the protective put in place. 
This strategy is equivalent to one that has been described before, the bull 
spread. Notice that the profit graph in Figure 17-2 has the same shape as the bull 
spread profit graph (Figure 7-1). This means that the two strategies are equivalent. 
In fact, in Chapter 7 it was pointed out that the bull spread could sometimes be con­
sidered a "substitute" for covered writing. Actually, the bull spread is more akin to 
this strategy- the covered write protected by a put purchase. There are, of course, 
differences between the strategies. They are equivalent in profit and loss potential, 
but the covered writer could never lose all his investment in a short period of time, 
although the spreader could. In order to actually use bull spreads as substitutes for 
covered writes, one would invest only a small portion of his available funds in the 
spread and would place the remainder of his funds in fixed-income securities. That 
strategy was discussed in more depth in Chapter 7. 
NO-COST COLLARS 
The "collar" strategy is often arrived at in another manner: a stockholder begins 
to worry about the downside potential of the stock market and decides to buy puts 
on his stock as protection. However, he is dismayed by the cost of the puts and so he 
also considers the sale of calls. If he buys an out-of-the-money put, it is quite possi­
ble that he might be able to sell an out-of-the-money call whose proceeds complete­
ly cover the cost of the put. Thus, he has established a protective collar at no cost -
at least no debit. His "cost" is the fact that he has forsaken the upside profit poten­
tial on his stock, above the striking price of the written call. 
In fact, certain large institutional traders are able to transact collars through 
large over-the-counter option brokers, such as Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley. 
They might even give the broker instructions such as this: "I own XYZ and I want to 
buy a put 10 percent out of the money that e.:\.J)ires in a year. What would the strik­
ing price of a one-year call have to be in order to create a no-cost collar?" The bro­
ker might then tell him that such a call would have to be struck 30 percent out of the 
money. The actual strike price of the call would depend on the volatility estimate for 
the underlying stock, as well as interest rates and dividends. These types of transac­
tions occur with a fair amount of frequency. 
Some very interesting situations can be created with long-term options. One of 
the most interesting occurred in 1999, when a company that owned 5 million shares 
of Cisco (CSCO) decided it would like to hedge them by creating a no-cost collar 
over the next three years. At the time, CSCO was trading at about 130, and its volatil­
ity was about 50%. It turns out that a three-year put struck at 130 sells for about the 

===== PDF PAGE 310 =====
278 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
large losses. The covered writer who buys puts may often find it easier to operate in 
a more rational manner when he has the protective put in place. 
This strategy is equivalent to one that has been described before, the bull 
spread. Notice that the profit graph in Figure 17-2 has the same shape as the bull 
spread profit graph (Figure 7-1). This means that the two strategies are equivalent. 
In fact, in Chapter 7 it was pointed out that the bull spread could sometimes be con­
sidered a "substitute" for covered writing. Actually, the bull spread is more akin to 
this strategy - the covered write protected by a put purchase. There are, of course, 
differences between the strategies. They are equivalent in profit and loss potential, 
but the covered writer could never lose all his investment in a short period of time, 
although the spreader could. In order to actually use bull spreads as substitutes for 
covered ,vrites, one would invest only a small portion of his available funds in the 
spread and would place the remainder of his funds in fixed-income securities. That 
strategy was discussed in more depth in Chapter 7. 
NO-COST COLLARS 
The "collar" strategy is often arrived at in another manner: a stockholder begins 
to worry about the downside potential of the stock market and decides to buy puts 
on his stock as protection. However, he is dismayed by the cost of the puts and so he 
also considers the sale of calls. If he buys an out-of-the-money put, it is quite possi­
ble that he might be able to sell an out-of-the-money call whose proceeds complete­
ly cover the cost of the put. Thus, he has established a protective collar at no cost -
at least no debit. His "cost" is the fact that he has forsaken the upside profit poten­
tial on his stock, above the striking price of the written call. 
In fact, certain large institutional traders are able to transact collars through 
large over-the-counter option brokers, such as Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley. 
They might even give the broker instructions such as this: "I own XYZ and I want to 
buy a put 10 percent out of the money that expires in a year. What would the strik­
ing p1ice of a one-year call have to be in order to create a no-cost collar?" The bro­
ker might then tell him that such a call would have to be struck 30 percent out of the 
money. The actual strike price of the call would depend on the volatility estimate for 
the underlying stock, as well as interest rates and dividends. These types of transac­
tions occur with a fair amount of frequency. 
Some very interesting situations can be created with long-term options. One of 
the most interesting occurred in 1999, when a company that owned 5 million shares 
of Cisco ( CSCO) decided it would like to hedge them by creating a no-cost collar 
over the next three years. At the time, CSCO was trading at about 130, and its volatil­
ity was about 50%. It turns out that a three-year put struck at 130 sells for about the 

===== PDF PAGE 311 =====
Cltapter 17: Put Buying in Conjunction with Common Stock Ownership 
TABLE 17-3. 
Highest Call Strike That Pays for an At-the-Money Put 
(Assuming 2.5 years to expiration) 
Volatility Coll Strike 
30% 
40% 
50% 
70% 
100% 
of Underlying 
30% out of money 
35% out of money 
40% out of money 
50% out of money 
70% out of money 
279 
same price as a three-year call struck at 200! That may seem illogical, but the figures 
can be checked out with the aid of an option-pricing model. Thus, this company was 
able to hedge all of its CSCO stock, with no downside risk ( the striking price of the 
puts was the same as the current stock price) and still had profit potential of over 50% 
to the upside over the next three years. 
Thus, one should consider using LEAPS options when he establishes a collar -
even ifhe is not an institutional trader - because the striking price of the calls can be 
quite high in comparison to that of the put' s strike or in comparison to the price of 
the underlying stock. Table 17-3 shows how far out-of-the-money a written call could 
be that still covers the cost of buying an at-the-money put. The time to expiration in 
this table is 2.5 years - the longest term listed option that currently exists as a LEAPS 
option. 
USING LOWER STRIKES AS A PARTIAL COVERED WRITE 
It should also be pointed out that one does not necessarily have to forsake all of 
the profit potential from his stock. He might buy the puts, as usual, and then sell calls 
with a somewhat lower strike than needed for a low-cost collar, but the quantity of 
calls sold would be less than that of stock owned. In that way, there would be unlim­
ited profit potential on some of the shares of the underlying stock. 
Example: Suppose that the following prices exist: 
XYZ:61 
Apr 55 put: 1 
Apr 65 call: 2 
Furthermore, suppose that one owns 1000 shares of XYZ. Thus, the purchase 
of 10 Apr 55 puts at 1 point apiece would protect the downside. In order to cover the 
cost of those puts ($1000), one need only sell five of the Apr 65 calls at 2 points 

===== PDF PAGE 312 =====
280 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
apiece. Thus, the protection would have cost nothing and there would still be unlim­
ited profit potential on 500 of the shares of XYZ, since only five calls were sold against 
the 1000 shares that are owned. 
In this manner, one could get quite creative in constructing collars - deciding 
what call strike to use in order to strike a balance between paying for the puts and 
allowing upside profit potential. The lower the strike he uses for the written calls, the 
fewer calls he will have to write; the higher the strike of the written calls, the more 
calls will be necessary to cover the cost of the purchased puts. The tradeoff is that a 
lower call strike allows for more eventual upside profit potential, but it limits what 
has been written against to a lower price. 
Using the above example once again, these facts can be demonstrated: 
Example (continued): As before, the same prices exist, but now one more call will 
be brought into the picture: 
XYZ: 61 
Apr55 put: l 
Apr 65 call: 2 
Apr 70 call: l 
As before one could sell five of the Apr 65 calls to cover the cost of ten puts, or 
as an alternative he could sell ten of the Apr 70 calls. If he sells the five, he has unlim­
ited profit potential on 500 shares, but the other 500 shares will be called away at 65. 
In the alternative strategy, he has limited upside profit potential, but nothing will be 
called away until the stock reaches 70. Which is "better?" It's not easy to say. In the 
former strategy, if the stock climbs all the way to 75, it results in the same profit as if 
the stock is called away at 70 in the latter strategy. This is true because 500 shares 
would be worth 75, but the other 500 would have been called away at 65 - making 
for an average of 70. Hence, the former strategy only outperforms the latter if the 
stock actually climbs above 75 - a rather unlikely event, one would have to surmise. 
Still, many investors prefer the former strategy because it gives them protection with­
out asking them to surrender all of their upside profit potential. 
In summary, one can often be quite creative with the "collar" strategy. One thing 
to keep in mind: if one sells options against stock that he has no intention of selling, he 
is actually writing naked calls in his ovm mind. That is, if one owns stock that "can't" 
be sold - perhaps the capital gains would be devastating or the stock has been "in the 
family" for a long time - then he should not sell covered calls against it, because he will 
be forced into treating the calls as naked (if he refuses to sell the stock). This can cause 
quite a bit of consternation if the underlying stock rises significantly in price, that could 
have easily been avoided by not writing calls against the stock in the first place. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 18 | PDF PAGES 313-323 =====

===== PDF PAGE 313 =====
CHAPCIJER 18 
Buying Puts in Conjunction 
with Call Purchases 
There are several ways in which the purchases of both puts and calls can be used to 
the speculator's advantage. One simple method is actually a follow-up strategy for the 
call buyer. If the stock has advanced and the call buyer has a profit, he might con­
sider buying a put as a means of locking in his call profits while still allowing for more 
potential upside appreciation. In Chapter 3, four basic alternatives were listed for the 
call buyer who had a profit: He could liquidate the call and take his profit; he could 
do nothing; he could "roll up" by selling the call for a profit and using part of the pro­
ceeds to purchase more out-of-the-money calls; or he could create a bull spread by 
selling the out-of-the-money call against the profitable call that he holds. If the 
underlying stock has listed puts, he has another alternative: He could buy a put. This 
put purchase would serve to lock in some of the profits on the call and would still 
allow room for further appreciation if the stock should continue to rise in price. 
Example: An investor initially purchased an XYZ October 50 call for 3 points when 
the stock was at 48. Sometime later, after the stock had risen to 58, the call would be 
worth about 9 points. If there was an October 60 put, it might be selling for 4 points, 
and the call holder could buy this put to lock in some of his profits. His position, after 
purchasing the put, would be: 
Long l October 50 call at 3 points N t t 7 • t - e cos: pom s Long l October 60 put at 4 points 
He would own a "strangle" - any position consisting of both a put and a call with dif­
fering terms - that is always worth at least 10 points. The combination will be worth 
exactly 10 points at expiration if XYZ is anywhere between 50 and 60. For example, 
281 

===== PDF PAGE 314 =====
282 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
if xyz is at 52 at expiration, the call will be worth 2 points and the put will be wort Ii 
8 points. Alternatively, if the stock is at 58 at expiration, the put will be worth 2 points 
and the call worth 8 points. Should xyz be above 60 at expiration, the combination's 
value will be equal to the call's value, since the put will expire worthless with XYZ 
above 60. The call would have to be worth more than 10 points in that case, since it 
has a striking price of 50. Similarly, if xyz were below 50 at expiration, the combi­
nation would be worth more than 10 points, since the put would be more than 10 
points in-the-money and the call would be worthless. 
The speculator has thus created a position in which he cannot lose money, 
because he paid only 7 points for the combination (3 points for the call and 4 points 
for the put). No matter what happens, the combination will be worth at least 10 
points at e:x-piration, and a 3-point profit is thus locked in. If xyz should continue to 
climb in price, the speculator could make more than 3 points of profit whenever xyz 
is above 60 at expiration. Moreover, if xyz should suddenly collapse in price, the 
speculator could make more than 3 points of profit if the stock was below 50 by expi­
ration. The reader must realize that such a position can never be created as an initial 
position. This desirable situation arose only because the call had built up a substan­
tial profit before the put was purchased. The similar strategy for the put buyer who 
might buy a call to protect his unrealized put profits was described in Chapter 16. 
STRADDLE BUYING 
A straddle purchase consists of buying both a put and a call with the same terms -
sarne underlying stock, striking price, and expiration date. The straddle purchase 
allows the buyer to make large potential profits if the stock moves far enough in 
either direction. The buyer has a predetermined maximum loss, equal to the amount 
of his initial investment. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
xyz common, 50; 
XYZ July 50 call, 3; and 
XYZ July 50 put, 2. 
If one purchased both the July 50 call and the July 50 put, he would be buying a 
straddle. This would cost 5 points plus commissions. The investment required to 
purchase a straddle is the net debit. If the underlying stock is exactly at 50 at expi­
ration, the buyer would lose all his investment, since both the put and the call would 
expire worthless. If the stock were above .55 at expiration, the call portion of the 

===== PDF PAGE 315 =====
18: Buying Puts in Conjundion with Call Purchases 283 
dle would be worth more than 5 points and the straddle buyer would make 
y, even though his put expired worthless. To the downside, a similar situation 
Mists. If XYZ were below 45 at expiration, the put would be worth more than 5 
points and he would have a profit despite the fact that the call expired worthless. 
Table 18-1 and Figure 18-1 depict the results of this example straddle purchase at 
expiration. The straddle buyer can immediately determine his break-even points at 
expiration - 45 and 55 in this example. He will lose money if the underlying stock is 
between those break-even points at expiration. He has potentially large profits if 
XYZ should move a great distance away from 50 by expiration. 
One would normally purchase a straddle on a relatively volatile stock that has 
the potential to move far enough to make the straddle profitable in the allotted time. 
This strategy is particularly attractive when option premiums are low, since low pre­
miums will mean a cheaper straddle cost. Although losses may occur in a relatively 
large percentage of cases that are held all the way until their expiration date, there is 
actually only a minute probability of losing one's entire investment. Even if XYZ 
should be at 50 at expiration, there would still be the opportunity to sell the straddle 
for a small amount on the final day of trading. 
TABLE 18-1. 
Results of straddle purchase at expiration. 
XYZ Price at Total Straddle 
Expiration Coll Profit Put Profit Profit 
30 -$ 300 +$1,800 + $1,500 
40 300 + 800 + 500 
45 300 + 300 0 
50 300 200 500 
55 + 200 200 0 
60 + 700 200 + 500 
70 + 1,700 200 + 1,500 
EQUIVALENCES 
Straddle buying is equivalent to the reverse hedge, a strategy described in Chapter 4 
in which one sells the underlying stock short and purchases two calls on the under­
lying stock. Both strategies have similar profit characteristics: a limited loss that 
would occur at the striking price of the options involved, and potentially large prof­
its if the underlying stock should rise or fall far enough in price. The straddle pur-

===== PDF PAGE 316 =====
284 
FIGURE 18-1. 
Straddle purchase. 
C: 
.Q 
I!! ·a. 
X 
w 
ro $0 en en 0 
..J 
0 
-e a.. 
-$500 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Stock Price at Expiration 
chase is superior to the reverse hedge, however, and where listed puts exist on a stock, 
the reverse hedge strategy becomes obsolete. The reasons that the straddle purchase 
is superior are that dividends are not paid by the holder and that commission costs 
are much smaller in the straddle situation. 
REVERSE HEDGE WITH PUTS 
A third strategy is equivalent to both the straddle purchase and the reverse hedge. 
It consists of buying the underlying stock and buying two put options. If the stock 
rises substantially in price, large profits will accrue, for the stock profit will more 
than offset the fixed loss on the purchase of two put options. If the stock declines in 
price by a large amount, profits will also be generated. In a decline, the profits gen­
erated by 2 long puts will more than offset the loss on 100 shares of long stock. This 
form of the straddle purchase has limited risk as well. The worst case would occur 
if the stock were exactly at the striking price of the puts at their expiration date - the 
puts would both expire worthless. The risk is limited, percentagevvise and dollar­
wise, since the cost of two put options would normally be a relatively small per­
centage of the total cost of buying the stock. Furthermore, the investor may receive 
some dividends if the underlying stock is a dividend-paying stock. Buying stock and 
buying two puts is superior to the reverse hedge strategy, but is still inferior to the 
straddle purchase. 

===== PDF PAGE 317 =====
ter 18: Buying Puts in Conjunction with Call Purchases 
IILECTING A STRADDLE BUY 
285 
In theory, one could find the best straddle purchases by applying the analyses for best 
call purchases and best put purchases simultaneously. Then, if both the puts and calls 
on a particular stock showed attractive opportunity, the straddle could be bought. 
The straddle should be viewed as an entire position. A similar sort of analysis to that 
proposed for either put or call purchases could be used for straddles as well. First, 
one would assume the stock would move up or down in accordance with its volatili­
ty within a fixed time period, such as 60 or 90 days. Then, the prices of both the put 
and the call could be predicted for this stock movement. The straddles that off er the 
best reward opportunity under this analysis would be the most attractive ones to buy. 
To demonstrate this sort of analysis, the previous example can be utilized again. 
Example: XYZ is at 50 and the July 50 call is selling for 3 while the July 50 put is sell­
ing for 2 points. If the strategist is able to determine that XYZ has a 25% chance of 
being above 54 in 90 days and also has a 25% chance of being below 46 in 90 days, 
he can then predict the option prices. A rigorous method for determining what per­
centage chance a stock has of making a predetermined price movement is presented 
in Chapter 28 on mathematical applications. For now, a general procedure of analy­
sis is more important than its actual implementation. If XYZ were at 54 in 90 days, it 
might be reasonable to assume that the call would be worth 5½ and the put would 
be worth 1 point. The straddle would therefore be worth 6½ points. Similarly, if the 
stock were at 46 in 90 days, the put might be worth 4½ points, and the call worth 1 
point, making the entire straddle worth 5½ points. It is fairly common for the strad­
dle to be higher-priced when it is a fixed distance in-the-money on the call side (such 
as 4 points) than when it is in-the-money on the put side by that same distance. In 
this example, the strategist has now determined that there is a 25% chance that the 
straddle will be worth 6½ points in 90 days on an upside movement, and there is a 
25% chance that the straddle will be worth 5½ points on a downside movement. The 
average price of these two expectations is 6 points. Since the straddle is currently sell­
ing for 5 points, this would represent a 20% profit. If all potential straddles are 
ranked in the same manner - allowing for a 25% chance of upside and downside 
movement by each underlying stock - the straddle buyer will have a common basis 
for comparing various straddle opportunities. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
It has been mentioned frequently that there is a good chance that a stock will remain 
relatively unchanged over a short time period. This does not mean that the stock will 

===== PDF PAGE 318 =====
286 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
never move much one way or the other, but that its net movement over the time peri­
od will generally be small. 
Example: If XYZ is currently at 50, one might say that its chances of being over .5.5 
at the end of 90 days are fairly small, perhaps 30%. This may even be supported by 
mathematical analysis based on the volatility of the underlying stock. This does not 
imply, however, that the stock has only a 30% chance of ever reaching 55 during the 
90-day period. Rather, it implies that it has only a 30% chance of being over 55 at the 
end of the 90-day period. These are two distinctly different events, with different 
probabilities of occurrence. Even though the probability of being over 55 at the end 
of 90 days might be only 30%, the probability of ever being over 55 during the 90-
day period could be amazingly high, perhaps as high as 80%. It is important for the 
straddle buyer to understand the differences between these events occurring, for he 
might often be able to take follow-up action to improve his position. 
Many times, after a straddle is bought, the underlying stock will begin to move 
strongly, making it appear that the straddle is immediately going to become prof­
itable. However, just as things are going well, the stock reverses and begins to change 
direction, perhaps so quickly that it would now appear that the straddle will become 
profitable on the other side. These volatile stock movements often result in little net 
change, however, and at expiration the straddle buyer may have a loss. One might 
think that he would take profits on the call side when they became available in a 
quick upward movement, and then hope for a downward reversal so that he could 
take profits on the put side as well. Taking small profits, however, is a poor strategy. 
Straddle buying has limited losses and potentially unlimited profits. One might have 
to suffer through a substantial number of small losses before hitting a big winner, but 
the magnitude of the gain on that one large stock movement can offset many small 
losses. By taking small profits, the straddle buyer is immediately cutting off his 
chances for a substantial gain; that is why it is a poor strategy to limit the profits. 
This is one of those statements that sounds easier in theory than it is in practice. 
It is emotionally distressing to watch the straddle gain 2 or 3 points in a short time 
period, only to lose that and more when the stock fails to follow through. By using a 
different example, it is possible to demonstrate the types of follow-up action that the 
straddle buyer might take. 
Example: One had initially bought an XYZ January 40 straddle for 6 points when the 
stock was 40. After a fairly short time, the stock jumps up to 45 and the following 
prices exist: 

===== PDF PAGE 319 =====
Cl,apter 18: Buying Puts in Conjunction with Call Purchases 
XYZ common, 45: 
XYZ January 40 call, 7; 
XYZ January 40 put, l; and 
XYZ January 45 put, 3. 
287 
The straddle itself is now worth 8 points. The January 45 put price is included 
because it will be part of one of the follow-up strategies. What could the straddle 
buyer do at this time? First, he might do nothing, preferring to let the straddle run 
its course, at least for three months or so. Assuming that he is not content to sit tight, 
however, he might sell the call, taking his profit, and hope for the stock to then drop 
in price. This is an inferior course of action, since he would be cutting off potential 
large profits to the upside. 
In the older, over-the-counter option market, one might have tried a technique 
known as trading against the straddle. Since there was no secondary market for 
over-the-counter options, straddle buyers often traded the stock itself against the 
straddle that they owned. This type of follow-up action dictated that, if the stock 
rose enough to make the straddle profitable to the upside, one would sell short the 
underlying stock. This involved no extra risk, since if the stock continued up, the 
straddle holder could always exercise his call to cover the short sale for a profit. 
Conversely, if the underlying stock fell at the outset, making the straddle profitable 
to the downside, one would buy the underlying stock. Again, this involved no extra 
risk if the stock continued down, since the put could always be exercised to sell the 
stock at a profit. The idea was to be able to capitalize on large stock price reversals 
with the addition of the stock position to the straddle. This strategy worked best for 
the brokers, who made numerous commissions as the trader tried to gauge the 
whipsaws in the market. In the listed options market, the same strategic effect can 
be realized ( without as large a commission expense) by merely selling out the long 
call on an upward move, and using part of the proceeds to buy a second put similar 
to the one already held. On a downside move, one could sell out the long put for a 
profit and buy a second call similar to the one he already owns. In the example 
above, the call would be sold for 7 points and a second January 40 put purchased for 
1 point. This would allow the straddle buyer to recover his initial 6-point cost and 
would allow for large downside profit potential. This strategy is not recommended, 
however, since the straddle buyer is limiting his profit in the direction that the stock 
is moving. Once the stock has moved from 40 to 45, as in this example, it would be 
more reasonable to expect that it could continue up rather than experience a drop 
of more than 5 points. 

===== PDF PAGE 320 =====
288 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
A rrwre desirable sort off allow-up action would be one whereby the straddle 
buyer could retain much of the profit already built up without limiting further poten­
tial profits if the stock continues to run. In the example above, the straddle buyer 
could use the January 45 put - the one at the higher price - for this purpose. 
Example: Suppose that when the stock got to 45, he sold the put that he owned, the 
January 40, for 1 point, and simultaneously bought the January 45 put for 3 points. 
This transaction would cost 2 points, and would leave him in the following position: 
Long 1 January 40 call C b· d t 8 . t - om me cos : porn s Long 1 January 45 put 
He now owns a combination at a cost of 8 points. However, no matter where the 
underlying stock is at expiration, this combination will be worth at least 5 points, 
since the put has a striking price 5 points higher than the call's striking price. In fact, 
if the stock is above 45 at expiration or is below 40 at expiration, the straddle will be 
worth more than 5 points. This follow-up action has not limited the potential profits. 
If the stock continues to rise in price, the call will become more and more valuable. 
On the other hand, if the stock reverses and falls dramatically, the put will become 
quite valuable. In either case, the opportunity for large potential profits remains. 
Moreover, the investor has improved his risk exposure. The most that the new posi­
tion can lose at expiration is 3 points, since the combination cost 8 points originally, 
and can be sold for 5 points at worst. 
To summarize, if the underlying stock moves up to the ne:t"t strike, the straddle 
buyer should consider rolling his put up, selling the one that he is long and buying 
the one at the next higher striking price. Conversely, if the stock starts out with a 
downward move, he should consider rolling the call down, selling the one that he is 
long and buying the one at the next lower strike. In either case, he reduces his risk 
exposure without limiting his profit potential - exactly the type of follow-up result 
that the straddle buyer should be aiming for. 
BUYING A STRANGLE 
A strangle is a position that consists of both a put and a call, which generally have the 
same expiration date, but different striking prices. The fallowing example depicts a 
strangle. 
Example: One might buy a strangle consisting of an XYZ January 45 put and an XYZ 
January 50 call. Buying such a strangle is quite similar to buying a straddle, although 

===== PDF PAGE 321 =====
O.,,ter 18: Buying Puts in Conjunction with Call Purchases 289 
there are some differences, as the following discussion will demonstrate. Suppose the 
following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 47; 
XYZ January 45 put, 2; and 
XYZ January 50 call, 2. 
In this example, both options are out-of-the-money when purchased. This, again, is 
the most normal application of the strangle purchase. If XYZ is still between 45 and 
50 at January expiration, both options will expire worthless and the strangle buyer 
will lose his entire investment. This investment - $400 in the example - is generally 
smaller than that required to buy a straddle on XYZ. If XYZ moves in either direc­
tion, rising above 50 or falling below 45, the strangle will have some value at expira­
tion. In this example, ifXYZ is above 54 at expiration, the call will be worth more than 
4 points (the put will expire worthless) and the buyer will make a profit. In a similar 
manner, if XYZ is below 41 at expiration, the put will have a value greater than 4 
points and the buyer would make a profit in that case as well. The potential profits 
are quite large if the underlying stock should nwve a great deal before the options 
expire. Table 18-2 and Figure 18-2 depict the potential profits or losses from this 
position at January expiration. The maximum loss is possible over a much wider range 
than that of a straddle. The straddle achieves its maximum loss only if the stock is 
exactly at the striking price of the options at expiration. However, the strangle has its 
maximum loss anywhere between the two strikes at expiration. The actual amount of 
the loss is smaller for the strangle, and that is a compensating factor. The potential 
profits are large for both strategies. 
The example above is one in which both options are out-of-the money. It is also 
possible to construct a very similar position by utilizing in-the-money options. 
Example: With XYZ at 47 as before, the in-the-money options might have the fol­
lowing prices: XYZ January 45 call, 4; and XYZ January 50 put, 4. If one purchased 
this in-the-rrwney strangle, he would pay a total cost of 8 points. However, the value 
of this strangle will always be at least 5 points, since the striking price of the put is 5 
points higher than that of the call. The reader has seen this sort of position before, 
when protective follow-up strategies for straddle buying and for call or put buying 
were described. Because the strangle will always be worth at least 5 points, the most 
that the in-the-money strangle buyer can lose is 3 points in this example. His poten­
tial profits are still unlimited should the underlying stock move a large distance. 
Thus, even though it requires a larger initial investment, the in-the-rrwney strangle 
may often be a superior strategy to the out-of the-rrwney strangle, from a buyer's 

===== PDF PAGE 322 =====
290 
TABLE 18-2. 
Results at expiration of a strangle purchase. 
XYZ Price at 
Expiration 
25 
35 
41 
43 
45 
47 
50 
54 
60 
70 
FIGURE 18-2. 
Strangle purchase. 
C: 
0 
~ ·c. 
X 
w 
1ii 
(/) $0 (/) 
0 
..J 
6 
il= -$400 e a. 
Put Call 
Profit Profit 
+$1,800 -$ 200 
+ 800 200 
+ 200 200 
0 200 
200 200 
200 200 
200 200 
200 + 200 
200 + 800 
200 + 1,800 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Total 
Profit 
+$1,600 
+ 600 
0 
200 
400 
400 
400 
0 
+ 600 
+ 1,600 
viewpoint. The in-the-money strangle purchase certainly involves less percentage 
risk: The buyer can never lose all his investment, since he can always get back 5 
points, even in the worst case (when XYZ is behveen 45 and 50 at expiration). His 
percentage profits are lower with the in-the-money strangle purchase, since he paid 
more for the strangle to begin with. These observations should come as no surprise, 

===== PDF PAGE 323 =====
\O.,ter 18: Buying Puts in Conjunction with Call Purchases 291 
since when the outright purchase of a call was discussed, it was shown that the 
purchase of an in-the-money call was more conservative than the purchase of an out­
of-the-money call, in general. The same was true for the outright purchase of puts, 
perhaps even more so, because of the smaller time value of an in-the-money put. 
Therefore, the strangle created by the two an in-the-money call and an in-the­
money put - should be more conservative than the out-of-the-money strangle. 
If the underlying stock moves quickly in either direction, the strangle buyer 
may sometimes be able to take action to protect some of his profits. He would do so 
in a manner similar to that described for the straddle buyer. For example, if the stock 
moved up quickly, he could sell the put that he originally bought and buy the put at 
the next higher striking price in its place. If he had started from an out-of-the-money 
strangle position, this would then place him in a straddle. The strategist should not 
blindly take this sort of follow-up action, however. It may be overly expensive to "roll 
up" the put in such a manner, depending on the amount of time that has passed and 
the actual option prices involved. Therefore, it is best to analyze each situation on a 
case-by-case basis to see whether it is logical to take any follow-up action at all. 
As a final point, the out-of-the-money strangles may appear deceptively cheap, 
both options selling for fractions of a point as expiration nears. However, the proba­
bility of realizing the maximum loss equal to one's initial investment is fairly large 
with strangles. This is distinctly different from straddle purchases, whereby the prob­
ability of losing the entire investment is small. The aggressive speculator should not 
place a large portion of his funds in out-of-the-money strangle purchases. The per­
centage risk is smaller with the in-the-money strangle, being equal to the amount of 
time value premium paid for the options initially, but commission costs will be some­
what larger. In either case, the underlying stock still needs to move by a relatively 
large amount in order for the buyer to profit. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 19 | PDF PAGES 324-333 =====

===== PDF PAGE 324 =====
CH.APTER 19 
The Sale of a Put 
The buyer of a put stands to profit if the underlying stock drops in price. As might 
then be expected, the seller of a put will make money if the underlying stock increas­
es in price. The uncovered sale of a put is a more common strategy than the covered 
sale of a put, and is therefore described first. It is a bullishly-oriented strategy. 
THE UNCOVERED PUT SALE 
Since the buyer of a put has a right to sell stock at the striking price, the writer of a 
put is obligating himself to buy that stock at the striking price. For assuming this obli­
gation, he receives the put option premium. If the underlying stock advances and the 
put expires worthless, the put writer will not be assigned and he could make a maxi­
mum profit equal to the premium received. He has large downside risk, since the 
stock could fall substantially, thereby increasing the value of the written put and caus­
ing large losses to occur. An example will aid in explaining these general statements 
about risk and reward. 
Example: XYZ is at 50 and a 6-month put is selling for 4 points. The naked put writer 
has a fixed potential profit to the upside - $400 in this example and a large poten­
tial loss to the downside (Table 19-1 and Figure 19-1). This downside loss is limited 
only by the fact that a stock cannot go below zero. 
The collateral requirement for writing naked puts is the same as that for writ­
ing naked calls. The requirement is equal to 20% of the current stock price plus the 
put premium minus any out-of-the-money amount. 
Example: If XYZ is at 50, the collateral requirement for writing a 4-point put with a 
striking price of 50 would be $1,000 (20% of 5,000) plus $400 for the put premium 
292 

===== PDF PAGE 325 =====
Cl,opter 19: The Sale of a Put 
TABLE 19-1. 
Results from the sale of an uncovered put. 
XYZ Price at Put Price at 
Expiration Expiration (Parity) 
30 20 
40 10 
46 4 
50 0 
60 0 
70 0 
f IGURE 19-1. 
Uncovered sale of a put. 
$400 
C 
0 
~ ·5. 
X 
w 
'lii 
(/l $0 (/l 
.3 50 
0 
~ a. 
Stock Price at Expiration 
293 
Put Sale 
Profit 
-$1,600 
600 
0 
+ 400 
+ 400 
+ 400 
for a total of $1,400. If the stock were above the striking price, the striking price dif­
forential would be subtracted from the requirement. The minimum requirement is 
I 0% of the put' s striking price, plus the put premium, even if the computation above 
yields a smaller result. 
The uncovered put writing strategy is similar in many ways to the covered call 
writing strategy. Note that the profit graphs have the same shape; this means that the 
two strategies are equivalent. It may be helpful to the reader to describe the aspects 
of naked put writing by comparing them to similar aspects of covered call writing. 

===== PDF PAGE 326 =====
294 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
In either strategy, one needs to be somewhat bullish, or at least neutral, on the 
underlying stock. If the underlying stock moves upward, the uncovered put writer 
will make a profit, possibly the entire amount of the premium received. If the under­
lying stock should be unchanged at expiration - a neutral situation - the put writer 
will profit by the amount of the time value premium received when he initially wrote 
the put. This could represent the maximum profit if the put was out-of-the-money 
initially, since that would mean that the entire put premium was composed of time 
value premium. For an in-the-money put, however, the time value premium would 
represent something less than the entire value of the option. These are similar qual­
ities to those inherent in covered call writing. If the stock moves up, the covered call 
writer can make his maximum profit. However, if the stock is unchanged at expira­
tion, he will make his maximum profit only if the stock is above the call's striking 
price. So, in either strategy, if the position is established with the stock above the 
striking price, there is a greater probability of achieving the maximum profit. This 
represents the less aggressive application: writing an out-of-the-money put initially, 
which is equivalent to the covered write of an in-the-money call. 
The more aggressive application of naked put writing is to write an in-the­
money put initially. The writer will receive a larger amount of premium dollars for 
the in-the-money put and, if the underlying stock advances far enough, he will thus 
make a large profit. By increasing his profit potential in this manner, he assumes 
more risk. If the underlying stock should fall, the in-the-money put writer will lose 
money more quickly than one who initially wrote an out-of-the-money put. Again, 
these facts were demonstrated much earlier with covered call writing. An in-the­
money covered call write affords more downside protection but less profit potential 
than does an out-of-the-money covered call write. 
It is fairly easy to summarize all of this by noting that in either the naked put 
writing strategy or the covered call writing strategy, a less aggressive position is estab­
lished when the stock is higher than the striking price of the written option. If the 
stock is below the striking price initially, a more aggressive position is created. 
There are, of course, some basic differences between covered call writing and 
naked put writing. First, the naked put write will generally require a smaller invest­
ment, since one is only collateralizing 20% of the stock price plus the put premium, 
as opposed to 50% for the covered call write on margin. Also, the naked put writer is 
not actually investing cash; collateral is used, so he may finance his naked put writing 
through the value of his present portfolio, whether it be stocks, bonds, or government 
securities. However, any losses would create a debit and might therefore cause him 
to disturb a portion of this portfolio. It should be pointed out that one can, ifhe wish­
es, write naked puts in a cash account by depositing cash or cash equivalents equal to 
the striking price of the put. This is called "cash-based put writing." The covered call 

===== PDF PAGE 327 =====
O.,,ter 19: The Sale of a Put 295 
writer receives the dividends on the underlying stock, but the naked put writer does 
not. In certain cases, this may be a substantial amount, but it should also be pointed 
out that the puts on a high-yielding stock will have more value and the naked put 
writer will thus be taking in a higher premium initially. From strictly a rate of return 
viewpoint, naked put writing is superior to covered call writing. Basically, there is a 
different psychology involved in writing naked puts than that required for covered call 
writing. The covered call write is a comfortable strategy for most investors, since it 
involves common stock ownership. Writing naked options, however, is a more foreign 
concept to the average investor, even if the strategies are equivalent. Therefore, it is 
relatively unlikely that the same investor would be a participant in both strategies. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
The naked put writer would take protective follow-up action if the underlying stock 
drops in price. His simplest form of follow-up action is to close the position at a small 
loss if the stock drops. Since in-the-money puts tend to lose time value premium rap­
idly, he may find that his loss is often quite small if the stock goes against him. In the 
example above, XYZ was at 50 with the put at 4. If the stock falls to 45, the writer 
may be able to quite easily repurchase the put for 5½ or 6 points, thereby incurring 
a fairly small loss. 
In the covered call writing strategy, it was recommended that the strategist roll 
down wherever possible. One reason for doing so, rather than closing the covered call 
position, is that stock commissions are quite large and one cannot generally afford to 
be moving in and out of stocks all the time. It is more advantageous to try to preserve 
the stock position and roll the calls down. This commission disadvantage does not 
exist with naked put writing. When one closes the naked put position, he merely buys 
in the put. Therefore, rolling down is not as advantageous for the naked put writer. 
For example, in the paragraph above, the put writer buys in the put for 5½ or 6 
points. He could roll down by selling a put with striking price 45 at that time. 
However, there may be better put writing situations in other stocks, and there should 
be no reason for him to continue to preserve a position in XYZ stock 
In fact, this same reasoning can be applied to any sort of rolling action for the 
naked put writer. It is extremely advantageous for the covered call writer to roll for­
ward; that is, to buy back the call when it has little or no time value premium remain­
ing in it and sell a longer-term call at the same striking price. By doing so, he takes in 
additional premium without having to disturb his stock position at all. However, the 
naked put writer has little advantage in rolling forward. He can also take in addition­
al premium, but when he closes the initial uncovered put, he should then evaluate 

===== PDF PAGE 328 =====
296 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
other available put writing positions before deciding to write another put on the sam<' 
underlying stock. His commission costs are the same if he remains in XYZ stock or if 
he goes on to a put writing position in a different stock. 
EVALUATING A NAKED PUT WRITE 
The computation of potential returns from a naked put write is not as straightforward 
as were the computations for covered call writing. The reason for this is that the col­
lateral requirement changes as the stock moves up or down, since any naked option 
position is marked to the market. The most conservative approach is to allow enough 
collateral in the position in case the underlying stock should fall, thus increasing the 
requirement. In this way, the naked put writer would not be forced to prematurely 
close a position because he cannot maintain the margin required. 
Example: XYZ is at 50 and the October 50 put is selling for 4 points. The initial col­
lateral requirement is 20% of 50 plus $400, or $1,400. There is no additional require­
ment, since the stock is exactly at the striking price of the put. Furthermore, let us 
assume that the writer is going to close the position should the underlying stock fall 
to 43. To maintain his put write, he should therefore allow enough margin to collat­
eralize the position if the stock were at 43. The requirement at that stock price would 
be $1,560 (20% of 43 plus at least 7 points for the in-the-money amount). Thus, the 
put writer who is establishing this position should allow $1,560 of collateral value for 
each put written. Of course, this collateral requirement can be reduced by the 
amount of the proceeds received from the put sale, $400 per put less commissions in 
this example. If we assume that the writer sells 5 puts, his gross premium inflow 
would be $2,000 and his commission expense would be about $75, for a net premi­
um of $1,925. 
Once this information has been determined, it is a simple matter to determine 
the maximum potential return and also the downside break-even point. To achieve 
the maximum potential return, the put would expire worthless with the underlying 
stock above the striking price. Therefore, the maximum potential profit is equal to 
the net premium received. The return is merely that profit divided by the collateral 
used. In the example above, the maximum potential profit is $1,925. The collateral 
required is $1,560 per put (allowing for the stock to drop to 43) or $7,800 for 5 puts, 
reduced by the $1,925 premium received, for a total requirement of $5,875. The 
potential return is then $1,925 divided by $5,875, or 32.8%. Table 19-2 summarizes 
these calculations. 

===== PDF PAGE 329 =====
t,r 19: The Sale of a Put 
ILE 19-2. 
297 
lculation of the potential return of uncovered put writing. 
50 
4 
less commissions 
Potential maximum profit (premium received) 
Striking price 
Less premium per put ($1,925/5) 
Break-even stock price 
Collateral required (allowing for stock to drop to 43): 
20% of 43 
Plus put premium 
Requirement for 5 puts 
Less premium received 
Net collateral 
Potential return: 
Premium divided by net collateral 
$2,000 
75 
$1,925 
$50.00 
3.85 
46.15 
$ 860 
+ 700 
$1,560 
X 5 
$7,800 
- 1,925 
$5,875 
$1,925/$5,875 = 32.8% 
There are differences of opinion on how to compute the potential returns from 
naked put writing. The method presented above is a more conservative one in that it 
takes into consideration a larger collateral requirement than the initial requirement. 
Of course, since one is not really investing cash, but is merely using the collateral 
value of his present portfolio, it may even be correct to claim that one has no invest­
ment at all in such a position. This may be true, but it would be impossible to com­
pare various put writing opportunities without having a return computation available. 
One other important feature of return computations is the return if unchanged. 
If the put is initially out-of-the-money, the return if unchanged is the same as the 
maximum potential return. However, if the put is initially in-the-money, the compu­
tation must take into consideration what the writer would have to pay to buy back the 
put when it expires. 

===== PDF PAGE 330 =====
298 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Example: XYZ is 48 and the XYZ January 50 put is selling for 5 points. The profit 
that could be made if the stock were unchanged at expiration would be only 3 points, 
less commissions, since the put would have to be repurchased for 2 points with XYZ 
at 48 at expiration. Commissions for the buy-back should be included as well, to 
make the computation as accurate as possible. 
As was the case with covered call writing, one can create several rankings of 
naked put writes. One list might be the highest potential returns. Another list could 
be the put writes that provide the rrwst downside protection; that is, the ones that 
have the least chance of losing money. Both lists need some screening applied to 
them, however. When considering the maximum potential returns, one should take 
care to ensure at least some room for downside movement. 
Example: If XYZ were at 50, the XYZ January 100 put would be selling at 50 also and 
would most assuredly have a tremendously large maximum potential return. 
However, there is no room for downside movement at all, and one would surely not 
write such a put. One simple way of allowing for such cases would be to reject any 
put that did not offer at least 5% downside protection. Alternatively, one could also 
reject situations in which the return if unchanged is below 5%. 
The other list, involving maximum downside protection, also must have some 
screens applied to it. 
Example: With XYZ at 70, the XYZ January 50 put would be selling for½ at most. 
Thus, it is extremely unlikely that one would lose money in this situation; the stock 
would have to fall 20 points for a loss to occur. However, there is practically nothing 
to be made from this position, and one would most likely not ever write such a deeply 
out-of-the-money put. 
A minimum acceptable level of return must accompany the items on this list of 
put writes. For example, one might decide that the return would have to be at least 
12% on an annualized basis in order for the put write to be on the list of positions 
offering the most downside protection. Such a requirement would preclude an 
extreme situation like that shown above. Once these screens have been applied, the 
lists can then be ranked in a normal manner. The put writes offering the highest 
returns would be at the top of the more aggressive list, and those offering the high­
est percentage of downside protection would be at the top of the more conservative 
list. In the strictest sense, a more advanced technique to incorporate the volatility of 
the underlying stock should rightfully be employed. As mentioned previously, that 
technique is presented in Chapter 28 on mathematical applications. 

===== PDF PAGE 331 =====
19: The Sale of a Put 299 
YING STOCK BELOW ITS MARKET PRICE 
addition to viewing naked put writing as a strategy unto itself, as was the case in 
previous discussion, some investors who actually want to acquire stock will often 
te naked puts as well. 
bmple: XYZ is a $60 stock and an investor feels it would be a good buy at 55. He 
places an open buy order with a limit of 55. Three months later, XYZ has drifted 
down to 57 but no lower. It then turns and rises heavily, but the buy limit was never 
reached, and the investor misses out on the advance. 
This hypothetical investor could have used a naked put to his advantage. 
Suppose that when XYZ was originally at 60, this investor wrote a naked three-month 
put for 5 points instead of placing an open buy limit order. Then, if XYZ is anywhere 
below 60 at expiration, he will have stock put to him at 60. That is, he will have to buy 
stock at 60. However, since he received 5 points for the put sale, his net cost for the 
stock is 55. Thus, even ifXYZ is at 57 at expiration and has never been any lower, the 
investor can still buy XYZ for a net cost of 55. 
Of course, if XYZ rose right away and was above 60 at expiration, the put would 
not be assigned and the investor would not own XYZ. However, he would still have 
made $500 from selling the put, which is now worthless. The put writer thus assumes 
a more active role in his investments by acting rather than waiting. He receives at 
least some compensation for his efforts, even though he did not get to buy the stock. 
If, instead of rising, XYZ fell considerably, say to 40 by expiration, the investor 
would be forced to purchase stock at a net cost of 55, thereby giving himself an 
immediate paper loss. He was, however, going to buy stock at 55 in any case, so the 
put writer and the investor using a buy limit have the same result in this case. Critics 
may point out that any buy order for common stock may be canceled if one's opinion 
changes about purchasing the stock. The put writer, of course, may do the same thing 
by closing out his obligation through a closing purchase of the put. 
This technique is useful to many types of investors who are oriented toward 
eventually owning the stock. Large portfolio managers as well as individual investors 
may find the sale of puts useful for this purpose. It is a method of attempting to accu­
mulate a stock position at prices lower than today's market price. If the stock rises 
and the stock is not bought, the investor will at least have received the put premium 
as compensation for his efforts. 
SOME CAUTION IS REQUIRED 
Despite the seemingly benign nature of naked put writing, it can be a highly dan­
gerous strategy for two reasons: (1) Large losses are possible if the underlying stock 

===== PDF PAGE 332 =====
300 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
takes a nasty fall, and (2) collateral requirements are small, so it is possible to utilize 
a great deal of leverage. It may seem like a good idea to write out-of-the-money puts 
on "quality" stocks that you "wouldn't mind owning." However, any stock is subject 
to a crushing decline. In almost any year there are serious declines in one or more of 
the largest stocks in America (IBM in 1991, Procter and Gamble in 1999, and Xerox 
in 1999, just to name a few). If one happens to be short puts on such stocks - and 
worse yet, ifhe happens to have overextended himself because he had the initial mar­
gin required to sell a great deal of puts - then he could actually be wiped out on such 
a decline. Therefore, do not leverage your account heavily in the naked put strategy, 
regardless of the "quality" of the underlying stock. 
THE COVERED PUT SALE 
By definition, a put sale is covered only if the investor also owns a corresponding put 
with striking price equal to or greater than the strike of the written put. This is a 
spread. However,formargin purposes, one is covered ifhe sells a put and is also short 
the underlying stock. The margin required is strictly that for the short sale of the 
stock; there is none required for the short put. This creates a position with limited 
profit potential that is obtained if the underlying stock is anywhere below the strik­
ing price of the put at expiration. There is unlimited upside risk, since if the under­
lying stock rises, the short sale of stock will accrue losses, while the profit from the 
put sale is limited. This is really a position equivalent to a naked call write, except that 
the covered put writer must pay out the dividend on the underlying stock, if one 
exists. The naked sale of a call also has an advantage over this strategy in that com­
mission costs are considerably smaller. In addition, the time value premium of a call 
is generally higher than that of a put, so that the naked call writer is taking in more 
time premium. The covered put sale is a little-used strategy that appears to be infe­
rior to naked call writing. As a result, the strategy is not described more fully. 
RATIO PUT WRITING 
A ratio put write involves the short sale of the underlying stock plus the sale of 2 puts 
for each 100 shares sold short. This strategy has a profit graph exactly like that of a 
ratio call write, achieving its maximum profit at the striking price of the written 
options, and having large potential losses if the underlying stock should move too far 
in either direction. The ratio call write is a highly superior strategy, however, for the 
reasons just outlined. The ratio call writer receives dividends while the ratio put 

===== PDF PAGE 333 =====
Qapter 19: The Sale ol a Put 301 
writer would have to pay them out. In addition, the ratio call writer will generally be 
taking in larger amounts of time value premium, because calls have more time pre­
mium than puts do. Therefore, the ratio put writing strategy is not a viable one. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 20 | PDF PAGES 334-357 =====

===== PDF PAGE 334 =====
CHAPTER 20 
The Sale of a Straddle 
Selling a straddle involves selling both a put and a call with the same terms. As with 
any type of option sale, the straddle sale may be either covered or uncovered. Both 
uses are fairly common. The covered sale of a straddle is very similar to the covered 
call writing strategy and would generally appeal to the same type of investor. The 
uncovered straddle write is more similar to ratio call writing, and is attractive to the 
more aggressive strategist who is interested in selling large amounts of time premi­
um in hopes of collecting larger profits if the underlying stock remains fairly stable. 
THE COVERED STRADDLE WRITE 
In this strategy, one owns the underlying stock and simultaneously writes a straddle 
on that stock. This may be particularly appealing to investors who are already 
involved in covered call writing. In reality, this position is not totally covered - only 
the sale of the call is covered by the ownership of the stock. The sale of the put is 
uncovered. However, the name "covered straddle" is generally used for this type of 
position in order to distinguish it from the uncovered straddle write. 
Example: XYZ is at 51 and an XYZ January 50 call is selling for 5 points while an XYZ 
January 50 put is selling for 4 points. A covered straddle write would be established 
by buying 100 shares of the underlying stock and simultaneously selling one put and 
one call. The similarity between this position and a covered call writer's position 
should be obvious. The covered straddle write is actually a covered write - long 100 
shares of XYZ plus short one call - coupled with a naked put write. Since the naked 
put write has already been shown to be equivalent to a covered call write, this posi­
tion is quite similar to a 200-share covered call write. In fact, all the profit and loss 
302 

===== PDF PAGE 335 =====
er 20: The Sale of a Straddle 303 
aracteristics of a covered call write are the same for the covered straddle write. 
There is limited upside profit potential and potentially large downside risk. 
Readers will remember that the sale of a naked put is equivalent to a covered 
call write. Hence, a covered straddle write can be thought of either as the equivalent 
of a 200-share covered call write, or as the sale of two uncovered puts. In fact, there 
•• some merit to the strategy of selling two puts instead of establishing a covered 
straddle write. Commission costs would be smaller in that case, and so would the ini­
tial investment required (although the introduction of leverage is not always a good 
tlting). 
The maximum profit is attained if XYZ is anywhere above the striking price of 
50 at expiration. The amount of maximum profit in this example is $800: the premi­
um received from selling the straddle, less the 1-point loss on the stock if it is called 
11way at 50. In fact, the maximum profit potential of a covered straddle write is quick­
ly computed using the following formula: 
Maximum profit = Straddle premium + Striking price - Initial stock price 
The break-even point in this example is 46. Note that the covered writing por­
tion of this example buying stock at 51 and selling a call for 5 points - has a break­
even point of 46. The naked put portion of the position has a break-even point of 46 
as well, since the January 50 put was sold for 4 points. Therefore, the combined posi­
tion - the covered straddle write - must have a break-even point of 46. Again, this 
observation is easily defined by an equation: 
B ak . Stock price + Strike price - Straddle premium re -even pnce = 
2 
Table 20-1 and Figure 20-1 compare the covered straddle write to a 100-share cov­
ered call write of the XYZ January 50 at expiration. 
The attraction for the covered call writer to become a covered straddle writer is 
that he may be able to increase his return without substantially altering the parame­
ters of his covered call writing position. Using the prices in Table 20-1, if one had 
decided to establish a covered write by buying XYZ at 51 and selling the January 50 
call at 5 points, he would have a position with its maximum potential return anywhere 
above 50 and with a break-even point of 46. By adding the naked put to his covered 
call position, he does not change the price parameters of his position; he still makes 
his maximum profit anywhere above 50 and he still has a break-even point of 46. 
Therefore, he does not have to change his outlook on the underlying stock in order 
to become a covered straddle writer. 
The investment is increased by the addition of the naked put, as are the poten­
tial dollars of profit if the stock is above 50 and the potential dollars of loss if the stock 

===== PDF PAGE 336 =====
304 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
TABLE 20-1. 
Results at expiration of covered straddle write. 
Stock (A) 100-Shore (8) Put 
Price Covered Write Write 
35 
40 
46 
50 
60 
FIGURE 20-1. 
-$1, 100 
600 
0 
+ 400 
+ 400 
Covered straddle write. 
+$800 
§ +$400 
e ·5. 
~ 
al 
en $0 en 0 ...J 
c5 
e a. ~, 
,,' ,, ,, 
,, ,, 
,, ,, 
,, 
-$1, 100 
600 
0 
+ 400 
+ 400 
100-Share Covered 
Call Write 
~-----------------► 
, 46 50 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Covered Straddle 
Write (A+ 8) 
-$2,200 
- 1,200 
0 
+ 800 
+ 800 
is below 46 at expiration. The covered straddle writer loses money twice as fast on 
the downside, since his position is similar to a 200-share covered write. Because the 
commissions are smaller for the naked put write than for the covered call write, the 
covered call writer who adds a naked put to his position will generally increase his 
return somewhat. 
Follow-up action can be implemented in much the same way it would be for a 
covered call write. Whenever one would normally roll his call in a covered situation, 

===== PDF PAGE 337 =====
t,r 20: The Sale ol a Straddle 305 
now rolls the entire straddle - rolling down for protection, rolling up for an 
ease in profit potential, and rolling forward when the time value premium of the 
die dissipates. Rolling up or down would probably involve debits, unless one 
led to a longer maturity. 
Some writers might prefer to make a slight adjustment to the covered straddle 
ting strategy. Instead of selling the put and call at the same price, they prefer to 
ell an out-of-the-money put against the covered call write. That is, if one is buying 
XYZ at 50 and selling the call, he might then also sell a put at 45. This would increase 
his upside profit potential and would allow for the possibility of both options expir­
ing worthless if XYZ were anywhere between 45 and 50 at expiration. Such action 
would, of course, increase the potential dollars of risk if XYZ fell below 45 by expira­
tion, but the writer could always roll the call down to obtain additional downside pro­
tection. 
One final point should be made with regard to this strategy. The covered call 
writer who is writing on margin and is fully utilizing his borrowing power for call writ­
ing will have to add additional collateral in order to write covered straddles. This is 
because the put write is uncovered. However, the covered call writer who is operat­
ing on a cash basis can switch to the covered straddle writing strategy without put­
ting up additional funds. He merely needs to move his stock to a margin account and 
use the collateral value of the stock he already owns in order to sell the puts neces­
sary to implement the covered straddle writes. 
THE UNCOVERED STRADDLE WRITE 
In an uncovered straddle write, one sells the straddle without owning the underlying 
stock. In broad terms, this is a neutral strategy with limited profit potential and large 
risk potential. However, the probability of making a profit is generally quite large, 
and methods can be implemented to reduce the risks of the strategy. 
Since one is selling both a put and a call in this strategy, he is initially taking in 
large amounts of time value premium. If the underlying stock is relatively unchanged 
at expiration, the straddle writer will be able to buy the straddle back for its intrinsic 
value, which would normally leave him with a profit. 
Example: The following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 45; 
XYZ January 45 call, 4; and 
XYZ January 45 put, 3. 

===== PDF PAGE 338 =====
306 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
A straddle could be sold for 7 points. If the stock were above 38 and below 52 at expi­
ration, the straddle writer would profit, since the in-the-money option could ht· 
bought back for less than 7 points in that case, while the out-of-the-money option 
expires worthless (Table 20-2). 
TABLE 20-2. 
The naked straddle write. 
XYZ Price at Call Put Total 
Expiration Profit Profit Profit 
30 +$ 400 -$1,200 -$800 
35 + 400 700 - 300 
38 + 400 400 0 
40 + 400 200 + 200 
45 + 400 + 300 + 700 
50 100 + 300 + 200 
52 300 + 300 0 
55 600 + 300 - 300 
60 - 1,100 + 300 - 800 
Notice that Figure 20-2 has a shape like a roof. The maximum potential profit 
point is at the striking price at expiration, and large potential losses exist in either 
direction if the underlying stock should move too far. The reader may recall that the 
ratio call writing strategy - buying 100 shares of the underlying stock and selling two 
calls - has the same profit graph. These two strategies, the naked straddle write and 
the ratio call write, are equivalent. The two strategies do have some differences, of 
course, as do all equivalent strategies; but they are similar in that both are highly 
probabilistic strategies that can be somewhat complex. In addition, both have large 
potential risks under adverse market conditions or if follow-up strategies are not 
applied. 
The investment required for a naked straddle is the greater of the requirement 
on the call or the put. In general, this means that the margin requirement is equal to 
the requirement for the in-the-money option in a simple naked write. This require­
ment is 20% of the stock price plus the in-the-money option premium. The straddle 
writer should allow enough collateral so that he can take whatever follow-up actions 
he deems necessary without having to incur a margin call. If he is intending to close 
out the straddle if the stock should reach the upside break-even point - 52 in the 
example above - then he should allow enough collateral to finance the position with 

===== PDF PAGE 339 =====
ler 20: The Sale of a Straddle 
GURE 20-2. 
ked straddle sale. 
307 
Stock Price at Expiration 
the stock at 52. If, however, he is planning to take other action that might involve 
staying with the position if the stock goes to 55 or 56, he should allow enough collat­
eral to be able to finance that action. If the stock never gets that high, he will have 
excess collateral while the position is in place. 
SELECTING A STRADDLE WRITE 
Ideally, one would like to receive a premium for the straddle write that produces a 
profit range that is wide in relation to the volatility of the underlying stock. In the 
example above, the profit range is 38 to 52. This may or may not be extraordinarily 
wide, depending on the volatility of XYZ. This is a somewhat subjective measure­
ment, although one could construct a simple straddle writer's index that ranked strad­
dles based on the following simple formula: 
I d Straddle time value premium n ex= _______ ..._ ___ _ 
Stock price x Volatility 
Refinements would have to be made to such a ranking, such as eliminating cases in 
which either the put or the call sells for less than ¼ point ( or even 1 point, if a more 
restrictive requirement is desired) or cases in which the in-the-money time premium 
is small. Furthermore, the index would have to be annualized to be able to compare 
straddles for different expiration months. More advanced selection criteria, in the 

===== PDF PAGE 340 =====
308 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
form of an expected return analysis, will be presented in Chapter 28 on mathemati­
cal applications. 
More screens can be added to produce a more conservative list of straddl<' 
writes. For example, one might want to ignore any straddles that are not worth at 
least a fixed percentage, say 10%, of the underlying stock price. Also, straddles that 
are too short-term, such as ones with less than 30 days of life remaining, might b<' 
thrown out as well. The remaining list of straddle writing candidates should be ones 
that will provide reasonable returns under favorable conditions, and also should be 
readily adaptable to some of the follow-up strategies discussed later. Finally, one 
would generally like to have some amount of technical support at or above the lower 
break-even price and some technical resistance at or below the upper break-even 
point. Thus, once the computer has generated a list of straddles ranked by an index 
such as the one listed above, the straddle writer can further pare down the list by 
looking at the technical pictures of the underlying stocks. 
FOLLOW-UP ACTION 
The risks involved in straddle writing can be quite large. When market conditions are 
favorable, one can make considerable profits, even with restrictive selection require­
ments, and even by allowing considerable extra collateral for adverse stock move­
ments. However, in an extremely volatile market, especially a bullish one, losses can 
occur rapidly and follow-up action must be taken. Since the time premium of a put 
tends to shrink when it goes into-the-money, there is actually slightly less risk to the 
downside than there is to the upside. In an extremely bullish market, the time value 
premiums of call options will not shrink much at all and might even expand. This may 
force the straddle writer to pay excessive amounts of time value premium to buy back 
the written straddle, especially if the movement occurs well in advance of expiration. 
The simplest form of follow-up action is to buy the straddle back when and if the 
underlying stock reaches a break-even point. The idea behind doing so is to limit the 
losses to a small amount, because the straddle should be selling for only slightly more 
than its original value when the stock has reached a break-even point. In practice, 
there are several flaws in this theory. If the underlying stock arrives at a break-even 
point well in advance of expiration, the amount of time value premium remaining in 
the straddle may be extremely large and the writer will be losing a fairly large amount 
by repurchasing the straddle. Thus, a break-even point at expiration is probably a loss 
point prior to expiration. 
Example: After the straddle is established with the stock at 45, there is a sudden rally 
in the stock and it climbs quickly to 52. The call might be selling for 9 points, even 

===== PDF PAGE 341 =====
20: The Sale of a Straddle 309 
gh it is 7 points in-the-money. This is not unusual in a bullish situation. 
ver, the put might be worth 1 ½points.This is also not unusual, as out-of-the­
y puts with a large amount of time remaining tend to hold time value premium 
well. Thus, the straddle writer would have to pay 10½ points to buy back this 
dle, even though it is at the break-even point, 7 points in-the-money on the call 
This example is included merely to demonstrate that it is a misconception to 
ieve that one can always buy the straddle back at the break-even point and hold 
losses to mere fractions of a point by doing so. This type of buy-back strategy 
ks best when there is little time remaining in the straddle. In that case, the 
options will indeed be close to parity and the straddle will be able to be bought back 
for close to its initial value when the stock reaches the break-even point. 
Another follow-up strategy that can be employed, similar to the previous one 
but with certain improvements, is to buy back only the in-the-money option when it 
reaches a price equal to that of the initial straddle price. 
~mple: Again using the same situation, suppose that when XYZ began to climb 
heavily, the call was worth 7 points when the stock reached 50. The in-the-money 
option the call - is now worth an amount equal to the initial straddle value. It could 
then be bought back, leaving the out-of-the-money put naked. As long as the stock 
then remained above 45, the put would expire worthless. In practice, the put could 
be bought back for a small fraction after enough time had passed or if the underly­
Ing stock continued to climb in price. 
This type of follow-up action does not depend on taking action at a fixed stock 
price, but rather is triggered by the option price itself. It is therefore a dynamic sort 
of follow-up action, one in which the same action could be applied at various stock 
prices, depending on the amount of time remaining until expiration. One of the prob­
lems with closing the straddle at the break-even points is that the break-even point is 
C)nly a valid break-even point at expiration. A long time before expiration, this stock 
price will not represent much of a break-even point, as was pointed out in the last 
example. Thus, buying back only the in-the-money option at a fixed price may often 
be a superior strategy. The drawback is that one does not release much collateral by 
buying back the in-the-money option, and he is therefore stuck in a position with 
little potential profit for what could amount to a considerable length of time. The 
collateral released amounts to the in-the-money amount; the writer still needs to 
C.'Ollateralize 20% of the stock price. 
One could adjust this follow-up method to attempt to retain some profit. For 
example, he might decide to buy the in-the-money option when it has reached a 

===== PDF PAGE 342 =====
310 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
value that is 1 point less than the total straddle value initially taken in. This would 
then allow him the chance to make a I-point profit overall, if the other option expired 
worthless. In any case, there is always the risk that the stock would suddenly revers(' 
direction and cause a loss on the remaining option as well. This method of follow-up 
action is akin to the ratio writing follow-up strategy of using buy and sell stops on th<' 
underlying stock. 
Before describing other types of follow-up action that are designed to combat 
the problems described above, it might be worthwhile to address the method used in 
ratio writing - rolling up or rolling down. In straddle writing, there is often little to 
be gained from rolling up or rolling down. This is a much more viable strategy in ratio 
writing; one does not want to be constantly moving in and out of stock positions, 
because of the commissions involved. Howeve1~ with straddle writing, once one posi­
tion is closed, there is no need to pursue a similar straddle in that same stock. It may 
be more desirable to look elsewhere for a new straddle position. 
There are two other very simple forms of follow-up action that one might con­
sider using, although neither one is for most strategists. First, one might consider 
doing nothing at all, even if the underlying stock moves by a great deal, figuring that 
the advantage lies in the probability that the stock will be back near the striking price 
by the time the options expire. This action should be used only by the most diversi­
fied and well-heeled investors, for in extreme market periods, almost all stocks may 
move in unison, generating tremendous losses for anyone who does not take some 
sort of action. A more aggressive type off allow-up action would be to attempt to "leg 
out" of the straddle, by buying in the profitable side and then hoping for a stock price 
reversal in order to buy back the remaining side. In the example above, when XYZ 
ran up to 52, an aggressive trader would buy in the put at 1 ½, taking his profit, and 
then hope for the stock to fall back in order to buy the call in cheaper. This is a very 
aggressive type of follow-up action, because the stock could easily continue to rise in 
price, thereby generating larger losses. This is a trader's sort of action, not that of a 
disciplined strategist, and it should be avoided. 
In essence, follow-up action should be designed to do two things: First, to limit 
the risk in the position, and second, to still allow room for a potential profit to be 
made. None of the above types of follow-up action accomplish both of these purpos­
es. There is, however, a follow-up strategy that does allow the straddle writer to limit 
his losses while still allowing for a potential profit. 
Example: After the straddle was originally sold for 7 points when the stock was at 45, 
the stock experiences a rally and the following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
XYZ January 45 call, 7; 

===== PDF PAGE 343 =====
Cl,opter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 
XYZ January 45 put, l; and 
XYZ January 50 call, 3. 
311 
The January 50 call price is included because it will be part of the follow-up strategy. 
Notice that this straddle has a considerable amount of time value premium remain­
Ing in it, and thus would be rather expensive to buy back at the current time. 
Suppose, however, that the straddle writer does not touch the January 45 straddle 
tliat he is short, but instead buys the January 50 call for protection to the upside. 
Since this call costs 3 points, he will now have a position with a total credit of 4 points. 
(The straddle was originally sold for 7 points credit and he is now spending 3 points 
for the call at 50.) This action of buying a call at a higher strike than the striking price 
of the straddle has limited the potential loss to the upside, no matter how far the 
stock might run up. If XYZ is anywhere above 50 at expiration, the put will expire 
worthless and the writer will have to pay 5 points to close the call spread short 
January 45, long January 50. This means that his maximum potential loss is 1 point 
plus commissions if XYZ is anywhere above 50 at expiration. 
In addition to being able to limit the upside loss, this type of follow-up action 
still allows room for potential profits. If XYZ is anywhere between 41 and 49 at expi­
ration - that is, less than 4 points away from the striking price of 45 - the writer will 
he able to buy the straddle back for less than 4 points, thereby making a profit. 
Thus, the straddle writer has both limited his potential losses to the upside and 
also allowed room for profit potential should the underlying stock fall back in price 
toward the original striking price of 45. Only severe price reversal, with the stock 
falling back below 40, would cause a large loss to be taken. In fact, by the time the 
stock could reverse its current strong upward momentum and fall all the way back to 
40, a significant amount of time should have passed, thereby allowing the writer to 
purchase the straddle back with only a relatively small amount of time premium left 
in it. 
This follow-up strategy has an effect on the margin requirement of the position. 
When the calls are bought as protection to the upside, the writer has, for margin 
purposes, a bearish spread in the calls and an uncovered put. The margin for this 
position would normally be less than that required for the straddle that is 5 points 
in-the-money. 
A secondary move is available in this strategy. 
Example: The stock continues to climb over the short term and the out-of-the­
money put drops to a price of less than ½ point. The straddle writer might now 
consider buying back the put, thereby leaving himself with a bear spread in the 
calls. His net credit left in the position, after buying back the put at ½, would be 

===== PDF PAGE 344 =====
312 Part Ill: Put Optian Strategies 
3½ points. Thus, if XYZ should reverse direction and be within 3½ points of the 
striking price - that is, anywhere below 48½ - at expiration, the position will pro­
duce a profit. In fact, if XYZ should be below 45 at expiration, the entire bear 
spread will expire worthless and the strategist will have made a 3½-point profit. 
Finally, this repurchase of the put releases the margin requirement for the naked 
put, and will generally free up excess funds so that a new straddle position can be 
established in another stock while the low-requirement bear spread remains in 
place. 
In summary, this type of follow-up action is broader in purpose than any of the 
simpler buy-back strategies described earlier. It will limit the writer's loss, but not 
prevent him from making a profit. Moreover, he may be able to release enough mar­
gin to be able to establish a new position in another stock by buying in the uncov­
ered puts at a fractional price. This would prevent him from tying up his money 
completely while waiting for the original straddle to reach its expiration date. The 
same type of strategy also works in a downward market. If the stock falls after the 
straddle is written, one can buy the put at the next lower strike to limit the down­
side risk, while still allowing for profit potential if the stock rises back to the striking 
price. 
EQUIVALENT STOCK POSITION FOLLOW-UP 
Since there are so many follow-up strategies that can be used with the short straddle, 
the one method that summarizes the situation best is again the equivalent stock posi­
tion (ESP). Recall that the ESP of an option position is the multiple of the quantity 
times the delta times the shares per option. The quantity is a negative number if it is 
referring to a short position. Using the above scenario, an example of the ESP 
method follows: 
Example: As before, assume that the straddle was originally sold for 7 points, but the 
stock rallied. The following prices and deltas exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
XYZ Jan 45 call, 7; delta, .90; 
XYZ Jan 45 put, l; delta, - .10; and 
XYZ Jan 50 call, 3; delta, .60. 
Assume that 8 straddles were sold initially and that each option is for 100 shares of 
XYZ. The ESP of these 8 short straddles can then be computed: 

===== PDF PAGE 345 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 
Option 
Jan 45 call 
Jan 45 put 
Total ESP 
Position 
short 8 
short 8 
Delta 
0.90 
-0.10 
313 
ESP 
short 720 (-8 x . 9 x 1 00) 
long 80 (-8 x -. 1 x 100) 
short 640 shares 
Obviously, the position is quite short. Unless the trader were extremely bearish 
on XYZ, he should make an adjustment. The simplest adjustment would be to buy 
600 shares of XYZ. Another possibility would be to buy back 7 of the short January 
45 calls. Such a purchase would add a delta long of 630 shares to the position (7 x .9 
x 100). This would leave the position essentially neutral. As pointed out in the previ­
ous example, however, the strategist may not want to buy that option. If, instead, he 
decided to try to buy the January 50 call to hedge the short straddle, he would have 
to buy 10 of those to make the position neutral. He would buy that many because the 
delta of that January 50 is 0.60; a purchase of 10 would add a delta long of 600 shares 
to the position. 
Even though the purchase of 10 is theoretically correct, since one is only short 
8 straddles, he would probably buy only 8 January 50 calls as a practical matter. 
STARTING OUT WITH THE PROTECTION IN PLACE 
In certain cases, the straddle writer may be able to initially establish a position that 
has no risk in one direction: He can buy an out-of-the-money put or call at the same 
time the straddle is written. This accomplishes the same purposes as the follow-up 
action described in the last few paragraphs, but the protective option will cost less 
since it is out-of-the-money when it is purchased. There are, of course, both positive 
and negative aspects involved in adding an out-of-the-money long option to the strad­
dle write at the outset. 
Example: Given the following prices: 
XYZ, 45; 
XYZ January 45 straddle, 7; and 
XYZ January 50 call, 1 ½, 
the upside risk will be limited. If one writes the January 45 straddle for 7 points and 
buys the January 50 call for 1 ½ points, his overall credit will be 5½ points. He has no 
upside risk in this position, for if XYZ should rise and be over 50 at expiration, he will 
be able to close the position by buying back the call spread for 5 points. The put will 
expire worthless. The out-of-the-money call has eliminated any risk above 50 on the 

===== PDF PAGE 346 =====
312 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
3½ points. Thus, if XYZ should reverse direction and be within 3½ points of the 
striking price - that is, anywhere below 48½ - at expiration, the position will pro­
duce a profit. In fact, if XYZ should be below 45 at expiration, the entire bear 
spread will expire worthless and the strategist will have made a 3½-point profit. 
Finally, this repurchase of the put releases the margin requirement for the naked 
put, and will generally free up excess funds so that a new straddle position can be 
established in another stock while the low-requirement bear spread remains in 
place. 
In summary, this type of follow-up action is broader in purpose than any of the 
simpler buy-back strategies described earlier. It will limit the writer's loss, but not 
prevent him from making a profit. Moreover, he may be able to release enough mar­
gin to be able to establish a new position in another stock by buying in the uncov­
ered puts at a fractional price. This would prevent him from tying up his money 
completely while waiting for the original straddle to reach its expiration date. The 
same type of strategy also works in a downward market. If the stock falls after the 
straddle is written, one can buy the put at the next lower strike to limit the down­
side risk, while still allowing for profit potential if the stock rises back to the striking 
price. 
EQUIVALENT STOCK POSITION FOLLOW-UP 
Since there are so many follow-up strategies that can be used with the short straddle, 
the one method that summarizes the situation best is again the equivalent stock posi­
tion (ESP). Recall that the ESP of an option position is the multiple of the quantity 
times the delta times the shares per option. The quantity is a negative number if it is 
referring to a short position. Using the above scenario, an example of the ESP 
method follows: 
Example: As before, assume that the straddle was originally sold for 7 points, but the 
stock rallied. The following prices and deltas exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
XYZ Jan 45 call, 7; delta, .90; 
XYZ Jan 45 put, l; delta, - .10; and 
XYZ Jan 50 call, 3; delta, .60. 
Assume that 8 straddles were sold initially and that each option is for 100 shares of 
XYZ. The ESP of these 8 short straddles can then be computed: 

===== PDF PAGE 347 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 
Option 
Jan 45 call 
Jan 45 put 
Total ESP 
Position 
short 8 
short 8 
Delta 
0.90 
-0.10 
313 
ESP 
short 720 (-8 x .9 x 100) 
long 80 (-8 x -. 1 x 1 00) 
short 640 shares 
Obviously, the position is quite short. Unless the trader were extremely bearish 
on XYZ, he should make an adjustment. The simplest adjustment would be to buy 
600 shares of XYZ. Another possibility would be to buy back 7 of the short January 
45 calls. Such a purchase would add a delta long of 630 shares to the position (7 x .9 
x 100). This would leave the position essentially neutral. As pointed out in the previ­
ous example, however, the strategist may not want to buy that option. If, instead, he 
decided to try to buy the January 50 call to hedge the short straddle, he would have 
to buy 10 of those to make the position neutral. He would buy that many because the 
delta of that January 50 is 0.60; a purchase of 10 would add a delta long of 600 shares 
to the position. 
Even though the purchase of 10 is theoretically correct, since one is only short 
8 straddles, he would probably buy only 8 January 50 calls as a practical matter. 
STARTING OUT WITH THE PROTECTION IN PLACE 
In certain cases, the straddle writer may be able to initially establish a position that 
has no risk in one direction: He can buy an out-of-the-money put or call at the same 
time the straddle is written. This accomplishes the same purposes as the follow-up 
action described in the last few paragraphs, but the protective option will cost less 
since it is out-of-the-money when it is purchased. There are, of course, both positive 
and negative aspects involved in adding an out-of-the-money long option to the strad­
dle write at the outset. 
Example: Given the following prices: 
XYZ, 45; 
XYZ January 45 straddle, 7; and 
XYZ January 50 call, 1 ½, 
the upside risk will be limited. If one writes the January 45 straddle for 7 points and 
buys the January 50 call for 1 ½ points, his overall credit will be 5½ points. He has no 
upside risk in this position, for if XYZ should rise and be over 50 at expiration, he will 
be able to close the position by buying back the call spread for 5 points. The put will 
expire worthless. The out-of-the-money call has eliminated any risk above 50 on the 

===== PDF PAGE 348 =====
314 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
position. Another advantage of buying the protection initially is that one is protected 
if the stock should experience a gap opening or a trading halt. Ifhe already owns the 
protection, such stock price movement in the direction of the protection is of little 
consequence. However, if he was planning to buy the protection as a follow-up 
action, the sudden surge in the stock price may ruin his strategy. 
The overall profit potential of this position is smaller than that of the normal 
straddle write, since the premium paid for the long call will be lost if the stock is 
below 50 at expiration. However, the automatic risk-limiting feature of the long call 
may prove to be worth more than the decrease in profit potential. The strategist has 
peace of mind in a rally and does not have to worry about unlimited losses accruing 
to the upside. 
Downside protection for a straddle writer can be achieved in a similar manner 
by buying an out-of-the-money put at the outset. 
Example: With XYZ at 45, one might write the January 45 straddle for 7 and buy a 
January 40 put for I point if he is concerned about the stock dropping in price. 
It should now be fairly easy to see that the straddle writer could limit risk in 
either direction by initially buying both an out-of-the-money call and an out-of-the­
money put at the same time that the straddle is written. The major benefit in doing 
this is that risk is limited in either direction. Moreover, the margin requirements are 
significantly reduced, since the whole position consists of a call spread and a put 
spread. There are no longer any naked options. The detriment of buying protection 
on both sides initially is that commission costs increase and the overall profit poten­
tial of the straddle write is reduced, perhaps significantly, by the cost of two long 
options. Therefore, one must evaluate whether the cost of the protection is too large 
in comparison to what is received for the straddle write. This completely protected 
strategy can be very attractive when available, and it is described again in Chapter 23, 
Spreads Combining Calls and Puts. 
In summary, any strategy in which the straddle writer also decides to buy pro­
tection presents both advantages and disadvantages. Obviously, the risk-limiting fea­
ture of the purchased options is an advantage. However, the seller of options does not 
like to purchase pure time value premium as protection at any time. He would gen­
erally prefer to buy intrinsic value. The reader will note that, in each of the protec­
tive buying strategies discussed above, the purchased option has a large amount of 
time value premium left in it. Therefore, the writer must often try to strike a delicate 
balance between trying to limit his risk on one hand and trying to hold down the 
expenses of buying long options on the other hand. In the final analysis, however, the 
risk must be limited regardless of the cost. 

===== PDF PAGE 349 =====
314 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
position. Another advantage of buying the protection initially is that one is protected 
if the stock should experience a gap opening or a trading halt. If he already owns the 
protection, such stock price movement in the direction of the protection is of little 
consequence. However, if he was planning to buy the protection as a follow-up 
action, the sudden surge in the stock price may ruin his strategy. 
The overall profit potential of this position is smaller than that of the normal 
straddle write, since the premium paid for the long call will be lost if the stock is 
below 50 at expiration. However, the automatic risk-limiting feature of the long call 
may prove to be worth more than the decrease in profit potential. The strategist has 
peace of mind in a rally and does not have to worry about unlimited losses accruing 
to the upside. 
Downside protection for a straddle writer can be achieved in a similar manner 
by buying an out-of-the-money put at the outset. 
Example: With XYZ at 45, one might write the January 45 straddle for 7 and buy a 
January 40 put for l point if he is concerned about the stock dropping in price. 
It should now be fairly easy to see that the straddle writer could limit risk in 
either direction by initially buying both an out-of-the-money call and an out-of-the­
money put at the same time that the straddle is written. The major benefit in doing 
this is that risk is limited in either direction. Moreover, the margin requirements are 
significantly reduced, since the whole position consists of a call spread and a put 
spread. There are no longer any naked options. The detriment of buying protection 
on both sides initially is that commission costs increase and the overall profit poten­
tial of the straddle write is reduced, perhaps significantly, by the cost of two long 
options. Therefore, one must evaluate whether the cost of the protection is too large 
in comparison to what is received for the straddle write. This completely protected 
strategy can be very attractive when available, and it is described again in Chapter 23, 
Spreads Combining Calls and Puts. 
In summary, any strategy in which the straddle writer also decides to buy pro­
tection presents both advantages and disadvantages. Obviously, the risk-limiting fea­
ture of the purchased options is an advantage. However, the seller of options does not 
like to purchase pure time value premium as protection at any time. He would gen­
erally prefer to buy intrinsic value. The reader will note that, in each of the protec­
tive buying strategies discussed above, the purchased option has a large amount of 
time value premium left in it. Therefore, the ·writer must often try to strike a delicate 
balance between trying to limit his risk on one hand and trying to hold down the 
expenses of buying long options on the other hand. In the final analysis, however, the 
risk must be limited regardless of the cost. 

===== PDF PAGE 350 =====
314 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
position. Another advantage of buying the protection initially is that one is protected 
if the stock should expe1ience a gap opening or a trading halt. If he already owns the 
protection, such stock price movement in the direction of the protection is of little 
consequence. However, if he was planning to buy the protection as a follow-up 
action, the sudden surge in the stock price may ruin his strategy. 
The overall profit potential of this position is smaller than that of the normal 
straddle write, since the premium paid for the long call will be lost if the stock is 
below 50 at ex-piration. However, the automatic risk-limiting feature of the long call 
may prove to be worth more than the decrease in profit potential. The strategist has 
peace of mind in a rally and does not have to worry about unlimited losses accruing 
to the upside. 
Downside protection for a straddle writer can be achieved in a similar manner 
by buying an out-of-the-money put at the outset. 
Example: With XYZ at 45, one might write the January 45 straddle for 7 and buy a 
January 40 put for l point if he is concerned about the stock dropping in price. 
It should now be fairly easy to see that the straddle writer could limit risk in 
either direction by initially buying both an out-of-the-money call and an out-of-the­
money put at the same time that the straddle is written. The major benefit in doing 
this is that risk is limited in either direction. Moreover, the margin requirements are 
significantly reduced, since the whole position consists of a call spread and a put 
spread. There are no longer any naked options. The detriment of buying protection 
on both sides initially is that commission costs increase and the overall profit poten­
tial of the straddle write is reduced, perhaps significantly, by the cost of two long 
options. Therefore, one must evaluate whether the cost of the protection is too large 
in comparison to what is received for the straddle write. This completely protected 
strategy can be very attractive when available, and it is described again in Chapter 23, 
Spreads Combining Calls and Puts. 
In summary, any strategy in which the straddle writer also decides to buy pro­
tection presents both advantages and disadvantages. Obviously, the risk-limiting fea­
ture of the purchased options is an advantage. However, the seller of options does not 
like to purchase pure time value premium as protection at any time. He would gen­
erally prefer to buy intrinsic value. The reader will note that, in each of the protec­
tive buying strategies discussed above, the purchased option has a large amount of 
time value premium left in it. Therefore, the writer must often try to strike a delicate 
balance between trying to limit his risk on one hand and trying to hold down the 
expenses of buying long options on the other hand. In the final analysis, however, the 
risk must be limited regardless of the cost. 

===== PDF PAGE 351 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 315 
STRANGLE (COMBINATION) WRITING 
Recall that a strangle is any position involving both puts and calls, when there is some 
difference in the terms of the options. Commonly, the puts and calls will have the 
same expiration date but differing striking prices. A strangle write is usually estab­
lished by selling both an out-of-the-money put and an out-of-the-money call with the 
stock approximately centered between the two striking prices. In this way, the naked 
option writer can remain neutral on the outlook for the underlying stock, even when 
the stock is not near a striking price. 
This strategy is quite similar to straddle writing, except that the strangle 
writer makes his maximum profit over a much wider range than the straddle 
writer does. In this or any other naked writing strategy, the most money that the 
strategist can make is the amount of the premium received. The straddle writer 
has only a minute chance of making a profit of the entire straddle premium, since 
the stock would have to be exactly at the striking price at expiration in order for 
both the written put and call to expire worthless. The strangle writer will make his 
maximum profit potential if the stock is anywhere between the two strikes at expi­
ration, because both options will expire worthless in that case. This strategy is 
equivalent to the variable ratio write described previously in Chapter 6 on ratio 
call writing. 
Example: Given the following prices: 
XYZ common, 65; 
XYZ January 70 call, 4; and 
XYZ January 60 put, 3, 
a strangle write would be established by selling the January 70 call and the January 
60 put. IfXYZ is anywhere between 60 and 70 at January expiration, both options will 
expire worthless and the strangle writer will make a profit of 7 points, the amount of 
the original credit taken in. If XYZ is above 70 at expiration, the strategist will have 
to pay something to buy back the call. For example, if XYZ is at 77 at expiration, the 
January 70 call will have to be bought back for 7 points, thereby creating a break-even 
situation. To the downside, if XYZ were at 53 at expiration, the January 60 put would 
have to be bought back for 7 points, thereby defining that as the downside break­
even point. Table 20-3 and Figure 20-3 outline the potential results of this strangle 
write. The profit range in this example is quite wide, extending from 53 on the down­
side to 77 on the upside. With the stock presently at 65, this is a relatively neutral 
position. 

===== PDF PAGE 352 =====
316 
TABLE 20-3. 
Results of a combination write. 
Stock Price at Coll 
Expiration Profit 
40 +$ 400 
50 + 400 
53 + 400 
57 + 400 
60 + 400 
65 + 400 
70 + 400 
73 + 100 
77 300 
80 600 
90 - 1,600 
FIGURE 20-3. 
Sale of a combination. 
C: 
~ +$700 
·5. 
X 
UJ 
rn 
en en 
0 ....I 
ci 
e a.. 
$0 
Put 
Profit 
$1,700 
700 
400 
0 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
+ 300 
Stock Price at Expiration 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Total 
Profit 
-$1,300 
300 
0 
+ 400 
+ 700 
+ 700 
+ 700 
+ 400 
0 
300 
- 1,300 
At first glance, this may seem to be a more conservative strategy than straddle 
writing, because the profit range is wider and the stock needs to move a great deal to 
reach the break-even points. In the absence of follow-up action, this is a true obser­
vation. However, if the stock begins to rise quickly or to drop dramatically, the stran­
gle writer often has little recourse but to buy back the in-the-money option in order 

===== PDF PAGE 353 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 317 
to limit his losses. This can, as has been shown previously, entail a purchase price 
involving excess amounts of time value premium, thereby generating a significant 
loss. 
The only other alternative that is available to the strangle writer ( outside of 
attempting to trade out of the position) is to convert the position into a straddle if the 
stock reaches either break-even point. 
Example: IfXYZ rose to 70 or 71 in the previous example, the January 70 put would 
be sold. Depending on the amount of collateral available, the January 60 put may or 
may not be bought back when the January 70 put is sold. This action of converting 
the strangle write into a straddle write will work out well if the stock stabilizes. It 
will also lessen the pain if the stock continues to rise. However, if the stock revers­
es direction, the January 70 put write will prove to be unprofitable. Technical analy­
sis of the underlying stock may prove to be of some help in deciding whether or not 
to convert the strangle write into a straddle. If there appears to be a relatively large 
chance that the stock could fall back in price, it is probably not worthwhile to roll 
the put up. 
This example of a strangle write is one in which the writer received a large 
amount of premium for selling the put and the call. Many times, however, an aggres­
sive strangle writer is tempted to sell two out-of-the-money options that have only a 
short life remaining. These options would generally be sold at fractional prices. This 
can be an extremely aggressive strategy at times, for if the underlying stock should 
move quickly in either direction through a striking price, there is little the strangle 
writer can do. He must buy in the options to limit his loss. Nevertheless, this type of 
strangle writing - selling short-term, fractionally priced, out-of-the-money options -
appeals to many writers. This is a similar philosophy to that of the naked call writer 
described in Chapter 5, who writes calls that are nearly restricted, figuring there will 
be a large probability that the option will expire worthless. It also has the same risk: 
A large price change or gap opening can cause such devastating losses that many 
profitable trades are wiped away. Selling fractionally priced combinations is a poor 
strategy and should be avoided. 
Before leaving the topic of strangle writing, it may be useful to determine how 
the margin requirements apply to a strangle write. Recall that the margin require­
ment for writing a straddle is 20% of the stock price plus the price of either the put 
or the call, whichever is in-the-money. In a strangle write, however, both options may 
be out-of-the-money, as in the example above. When this is the case, the straddle 
writer is allowed to deduct the smaller out-of-the-money amount from his require­
ment. Thus, if XYZ were at 68 and the January 60 put and the January 70 call had 
been written, the collateral requirement would be 20% of the stock price, plus the 

===== PDF PAGE 354 =====
318 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
call premium, less $200 - the lesser out-of-the-money amount. The call is 2 points 
out-of-the-money and the put is 8 points out-of-the-money. Actually, the true collat­
eral requirement for any write involving both puts and calls - straddle write or stran­
gle write - is the greater of the requirement on the put or the call, plus the amount by 
which the other option is in-the-nwney. The last phrase, the amount by which the 
other option is in-the-money, applies to a situation in which a strangle had been con­
structed by selling two in-the-money options. This is a less popular strategy, since the 
writer generally receives less time value premium by writing two in-the-money 
options. An example of an in-the-money strangle is to sell the January 60 call and the 
January 70 put with the stock at 65. 
FURTHER COMMENTS ON UNCOVERED STRADDLE 
AND STRANGLE WRITING 
When ratio writing was discussed, it was noted that it was a strategy with a high prob­
ability of making a limited profit. Since the straddle write is equivalent to the ratio 
write and the strangle write is equivalent to the variable ratio write, the same state­
ment applies to these strategies. The practitioner of straddle and strangle writing 
must realize, however, that protective follow-up action is mandatory in limiting loss­
es in a very volatile market. There are other techniques that the straddle writer can 
sometimes use to help reduce his risk. 
It has often been mentioned that puts lose their time value premium more 
quickly when they become in-the-money options than calls do. One can often con­
struct a neutral position by writing an extra put or two. That is, if one sells 5 or 6 puts 
and 4 calls 'Ai.th the same terms, he may often have created a more neutral position 
than a straddle write. If the stock moves up and the call picks up time premium in a 
bullish market, the extra puts 'Aill help to offset the negative effect of the calls. On 
the other hand, if the stock drops, the 5 or 6 puts will not hold as much time premi­
um as the 4 calls are losing - again a neutral, standoff position. If the stock begins to 
drop too much, the writer can always balance out the position by selling another call 
or two. The advantage of writing an extra put or two is that it counterbalances the 
straddle writer's most severe enemy: a quick, extremely bullish rise by the underly­
ing stock. 
USING THE DELTAS 
This analysis, that adding an extra short put creates a neutral position, can be sub­
stantiated more rigorously. Recall that a ratio writer or ratio spreader can use the 

===== PDF PAGE 355 =====
Chapter 20: The Sale of a Straddle 319 
deltas of the options involved in his position to determine a neutral ratio. The strad­
dle writer can do the same thing, of course. It was stated that the difference between 
a call's delta and a put' s delta is approximately one. Using the same prices as in the 
previous straddle writing example, and assuming the call's delta to be .60, a neutral 
ratio can be determined. 
Prices 
XYZ common: 
XYZ January 45 call: 
XYZ January 45 put: 
45 
4 
3 
Deltas 
.60 
-.40 (.60 - 1) 
The put has a negative delta, to indicate that the put and the underlying stock are 
inversely related. A neutral ratio is determined by dividing the call's delta by the put's 
delta and ignoring the minus sign. The resultant ratio - 1.5:1 (.60/.40) in this case -
is the ratio of puts to sell for each call that is sold. Thus, one should sell 3 puts and 
sell 2 calls to establish a neutral position. The reader may wonder if the assumption 
that an at-the-money call has a delta of .60 is a fair one. It generally is, although very 
long-term calls will have higher at-the-money deltas, and very short-term calls will 
have deltas near .50. Consequently, a 3:2 ratio is often a neutral one. When neutral 
ratios were discussed with respect to ratio writing, it was mentioned that selling 5 
calls and buying 300 shares of stock often results in neutral ratio. The reader should 
note that a straddle constructed by selling 3 puts and 2 calls is equivalent to the ratio 
write in which one sells 5 calls and buys 300 shares of stock. 
If a straddle writer is going to use the deltas to determine his neutral ratio, he 
should compute each one at the time of his initial investment, of course, rather than 
relying on a generality such as that 3 puts and 2 calls often result in a neutral posi­
tion. The deltas can be used as a follow-up action, by adjusting the ratio to remain 
neutral after a move by the underlying stock. 
AVOID EXCESS TRADING 
In any of the straddle and strangle writing strategies described above, too much fol­
low-up action can be detrimental because of the commission costs involved. Thus, 
although it is important to take protective action, the straddle writer should plan in 
advance to make the minimum number of strategic moves to protect himself. That is 
why buying protection is often useful; not only does it limit the risk in the direction 
that the stock is moving, but it also involves only one additional option commission. 
In fact, if it is feasible, buying protection at the outset is often a better strategy than 
protecting as a secondary action. 

===== PDF PAGE 356 =====
320 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
An extension of this concept of trying to avoid too much follow-up action is that 
the strategist should not attempt to anticipate movement in an underlying stock. For 
example, if the straddle writer has planned to take defensive action should the stock 
reach 50, he should not anticipate by taking action with the stock at 48 or 49. It is 
possible that the stock could retreat back down; then the writer would have taken a 
defensive action that not only cost him commissions, but reduced his profit potential. 
Of course, there is a little trader in everyone, and the temptation to anticipate (or to 
wait too long) is always there. Unless there are very strong technical reasons for doing 
so, the strategist should resist the temptation to trade, and should operate his strate­
gy according to his original plan. The ratio writer may actually have an advantage in 
this respect, because he can use buy and sell stops on the underlying stock to remove 
the emotion from his follow-up strategy. This technique was described in Chapter 6 
on ratio call writing. Unfortunately, no such emotionless technique exists for the 
straddle or strangle writer. 
USING THE CREDITS 
In previous chapters, it was mentioned that the sale of uncovered options does not 
require any cash investment on the pait of the strategist. He may use the collateral 
value of his present portfolio to finance the sale of naked options. Moreover, once he 
sells the uncovered options, he can take the premium dollars that he has brought in 
from the sales to buy fixed-income securities, such as Treasury bills. The same state­
ments naturally apply to the straddle writing and strangle writing strategies. However, 
the strategist should not be overly obsessed with continuing to maintain a credit bal­
ance in his positions, nor should he strive to hold onto the Treasury bills at all costs. If 
one's follow-up actions dictate that he must take a debit to avoid losses or that he 
should sell out his Treasury bills to keep a credit, he should by all means do so. 

===== PDF PAGE 357 =====
Synthetic Stock Positions 
Created by Puts and Calls 
It is possible for a strategist to establish a position that is essentially the same as a 
stock position, and he can do this using only options. The option position generally 
requires a smaller margin investment and may have other residual benefits over sim­
ply buying stock or selling stock short. In brief, the strategies are summarized by: 
1. Buy call and sell put instead of buying stock. 
2. Buy put and sell call instead of selling stock short. 
SYNTHETIC LONG STOCK 
When one buys a call and sells a put at the same strike, he sets up a position that is 
equivalent to owning the stock. His position is sometimes called "synthetic" long 
stock. 
Example: To verify that this option position acts much like a long stock position 
would, suppose that the following prices exist: 
XYZ common, 50; 
XYZ January 50 call, 5; and 
XYZ January 50 put, 4. 
If one were bullish on XYZ and wanted to buy stock at 50, he might consider the 
alternative strategy of buying the January 50 call and selling (uncovered) the January 
321 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 21 | PDF PAGES 358-365 =====

===== PDF PAGE 358 =====
322 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
50 put. By using the option strategy, the investor has nearly the same profit and loss 
potential as the stock buyer, as shown in Table 21-1. The two right-hand columns of 
the table compare the results of the option strategy with the results that would be 
obtained by merely owning the stock at .50. 
The table shows that the result of the option strategy is exactly $100 less than 
the stock results for any price at expiration. Thus, the "synthetic" long stock and the 
actual long stock have nearly the same profit and loss potentials. The reason there is 
a difference in the results of the two equivalent positions lies in the fact that the 
option strategist had to pay 1 point of time premium in order to set up his position. 
This time premium represents the $100 by which the "synthetic" position underper­
forms the actual stock position at expiration. Note that, with XYZ at 50, both the put 
and the call are completely composed of time value premium initially. The synthetic 
position consists of paying out 5 points of time premium for the call and receiving in 
4 points of time premium for the put. The net time premium is thus a 1-point pay­
out. 
The reason one would consider using the synthetic long stock position rather 
than the stock position itself is that the synthetic position may require a much small­
er investment than buying the stock would require. The purchase of the stock 
requires $5,000 in a cash account or $2,500 in a margin account (if the margin rate is 
50%). However, the synthetic position requires only a $100 debit plus a collateral 
requirement - 20% of the stock price, plus the put premium, minus the difference 
between the striking price and the stock price. The balance, invested in short-term 
funds, would earn enough money, theoretically, to offset the $100 paid for the syn­
thetic position. In this example, the collateral requirement would be 20% of $5,000, 
or $1,000, plus the $400 put premium, plus the $100 debit incurred by paying 5 for 
the call and only receiving 4 for the put. This is a total of $1,500 initially. There is no 
TABLE 21·1. 
Synthetic long stock position. 
XYZ Price at January 50 January 50 Total Option Long Stock 
Expiration Call Result Put Result Result Result 
40 -$500 -$600 -$1, 100 -$1,000 
45 - 500 - 100 600 500 
50 - 500 + 400 100 0 
55 0 + 400 + 400 + 500 
60 + 500 + 400 + 900 + 1,000 

===== PDF PAGE 359 =====
Chapter 21: Synthetic Stock Positions Created by Puts and Calls 323 
initial difference between the stock price and the striking price. Of course, this col­
lateral requirement would increase if the stock fell in price, and would decrease if the 
stock rose in price, since there is a naked put. Also notice that buying stock creates a 
$5,000 debit in the account, whereas the option strategy's debit is $100; the rest is a 
collateral requirement, not a cash requirement. 
The effect of this reduction in margin required is that some leverage is obtained 
in the position. If XYZ rose to 60, the stock position profit would be $1,000 for a 
return of 40% on margin ($1,000/$2,500). With the option strategy, the percentage 
return would be higher. The profit would be $900 and the return thus 60% 
($900/$1,500). Of course, leverage works to the downside as well, so that the percent 
risk is also greater in the option strategy. 
The synthetic stock strategy is generally not applied merely as an alternative to 
buying stock. Besides possibly having a smaller profit potential, the option strategist 
does not collect dividends, whereas the stock owner does. However, the strategist is 
able to earn interest on the funds that he did not spend for stock ownership. It is 
important for the strategist to understand that a long call plus a short put is equiva­
lent to long stock. It thus may be possible for the strategist to substitute the synthet­
ic option position in certain option strategies that normally call for the purchase of 
stock 
SYNTHETIC SHORT SALE 
A position that is equivalent to the short sale of the underlying stock can be estab­
lished by selling a call and simultaneously buying a put. This alternative option strat­
egy, in general, offers significant benefits when compared with selling the stock short. 
Using the prices above - XYZ at 50, January 50 call at 5, and January 50 put at 4 -
Table 21-2 depicts the potential profits and losses at January expiration. 
Both the option position and the short stock position have similar results: large 
potential profits if the stock declines and unlimited losses if the underlying stock rises 
in price. However, the option strategy does better than the stock position, because 
the option strategist is getting the benefit of the time value premium. Again, this is 
because the call has more time value premium than the put, which works to the 
option strategist's advantage in this case, when he is selling the call and buying the 
put. 
Two important factors make the option strategy preferable to the short sale of 
stock: (1) There is no need to borrow stock, and (2) there is no need for an uptick. 
When one sells stock short, he must first borrow the stock from someone who owns 
it. This procedure is handled by one's brokerage firm's stock loan department. If, for 

===== PDF PAGE 360 =====
324 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
TABLE 21-2. 
Synthetic short sale position. 
XYZ Price at January 50 January 50 Total Option Short Stock 
Expiration Coll Result Put Result Result Result 
40 +$500 +$600 +$1, 100 +$1,000 
45 + 500 + 100 + 600 + 500 
50 + 500 - 400 + 100 0 
55 0 - 400 400 500 
60 - 500 - 400 900 - 1,000 
some reason, no one who owns the stock wants to loan it out, then a short sale can­
not be executed. In addition, both the NYSE and NASDAQ require that a stock 
being sold short must be sold on an uptick. That is, the price of the short sale must 
be higher than the previous sale. This rule was introduced (for the NYSE) years ago 
in order to prevent traders from slamming the market down in a "bear raid." 
With the option "synthetic short sale" strategy, however, one does not have to 
worry about either of these factors. First, calls can be sold short at will; there is no 
need to borrow anything. Also, calls can be sold short (and puts bought) even though 
the underlying stock might be trading on a minus tick (a downtick). Many profes­
sional traders use the "synthetic short sale" strategy because it allows them to get 
equivalently short the stock in a very timely manner. If one wants to short stock, and 
if he has not previously arranged to borrow it, then some time is wasted while one's 
broker checks with the stock loan department in order to make sure that the stock 
can indeed be borrowed. 
There is a caveat, however. If one sells calls on a stock that cannot be borrowed, 
then he must be sure to avoid assignment. For if one is assigned a call, then he too 
will be short the stock. If the stock cannot be borrowed, the broker will buy him in. 
Thus, in situations in which the stock might be difficult to borrow, one should use a 
striking price such that the call is out-of-the-money when sold initially. This will 
decrease, but not eliminate, the possibility of early assignment. 
Leverage is a factor in this strategy also. The short seller would need $2,500 to 
collateralize this position, assuming that the margin rate is 50%. The option strategist 
initially only needs 20% of the stock price, plus the call price, less the credit received, 
for a $1,400 requirement. Moreover, one of the major disadvantages that was men­
tioned with the synthetic long stock position is not a disadvantage in the synthetic 
short sale strategy: The option trader does not have to pay out dividends on the 
options, but the short seller of stock must. 

===== PDF PAGE 361 =====
Chapter 21: Synthetic Stock Positions Created by Puts and Calls 325 
Because of the advantages of the option position in not having to pay out the 
dividend and also having a slightly larger profit potential from the excess time value 
premium, it may often be feasible for the trader who is looking to sell stock short to 
instead sell a call and buy a put. It is also important for the strategist to understand 
the equivalence between the short stock position and the option position. He might 
be able to substitute the option position in certain cases when the short sale of stock 
is normally called for. 
SPLITTING THE STRIKES 
The strategist may be able to use a slight variation of the synthetic strategy to set up 
an aggressive, but attractive, position. Rather than using the same striking price for 
the put and call, he can use a lower striking price for the put and a higher striking 
price for the call. This action of splitting apart the striking prices gives him some 
room for error, while still retaining the potential for large profits. 
BULLISHLY ORIENTED 
If an out-of-the-money put is sold naked, and an out-of-the-money call is simultane­
ously purchased, an aggressive bullish position is established - often for a credit. If 
the underlying stock rises far enough, profits can be generated on both the long call 
and the short put. If the stock remains relatively unchanged, the call purchase will be 
a loss, but the put sale will be a profit. The risk occurs if the underlying stock drops 
in price, producing losses on both the short put and the long call. 
Example: The following prices exist: XYZ is at 53, a January 50 put is selling for 2, 
and a January 60 call is selling for 1. An investor who is bullish on XYZ sells the 
January 50 put naked and simultaneously buys the January 60 call. This position 
brings in a credit of 1 point, less commissions. There is a collateral requirement 
necessary for the naked put. If XYZ is anywhere between 50 and 60 at January 
expiration, both options would expire worthless, and the investor would make a small 
profit equal to the amount of the initial credit received. If XYZ rallies above 60 by 
expiration, however, his potential profits are unlimited, since he owns the call at 60. 
His losses could be very large if XYZ should decline well below 50 before expiration, 
since he has written the naked put at 50. Table 21-3 and Figure 21-1 depict the 
results at expiration of this strategy. 
Essentially, the investor who uses this strategy is bullish on the underlying stock 
and is attempting to buy an out-of-the-money call for free. If he is moderately wrong 

===== PDF PAGE 362 =====
326 
TABLE 21-3. 
Bullishly split strikes. 
XYZ Price al January 50 
Expirafion 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
FIGURE 21-1. 
Bullishly split strikes. 
Pu! Profil 
-$800 
- 300 
+ 200 
+ 200 
+ 200 
+ 200 
+ 200 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
January 60 Tolal 
Call Profil Profif 
-$100 -$ 900 
- 100 400 
- 100 + 100 
- 100 + 100 
- 100 + 100 
+ 400 + 600 
+ 900 + 1,100 
Stock Price at Expiration 
and the underlying stock rallies only slightly or even declines slightly, he can still 
make a small profit. If he is correct, of course, large profits could be generated in a 
rally. He may lose heavily if he is very wrong and the stock falls by a large amount 
instead of rising. 
This strategy is often useful when options are overpriced. Suppose that one has 
a bullish opinion on the underlying stock, yet is dismayed to find that the calls are 
quite expensive. If he buys one of these expensive calls, he can mitigate the expen­
siveness somewhat by also selling an out-of-the-money put, which is presumably 

===== PDF PAGE 363 =====
Chapter 21: Synthetic Stock Positions Created by Puts and Calls 327 
somewhat expensive also. Thus, if he is right about the bullish attitude on the stock, 
he owns a call that is more "fairly priced" because its cost was reduced by the amount 
of the put sale. 
BEARISHLY ORIENTED 
There is a companion strategy for the investor who is bearish on a stock. He could 
attempt to buy an out-of-the-money put, giving himself the opportunity for substan­
tial profits in a stock price decline, and could "finance" the purchase of the put by 
writing an out-of-the-money call naked. The sale of the call would provide profits if 
the stock stayed below the striking price of the call, but could cost him heavily if the 
underlying stock rallies too far. 
Example: With XYZ at 65, the bearish investor buys a February 60 put for 2 points, 
and simultaneously sells a February 70 call for 3 points. These trades bring in a cred­
it of 1 point, less commissions. The investor must collateralize the sale of the call. If 
XYZ should decline substantially by February expiration, large profits are possible 
because the February 60 put is owned. Even if XYZ does not perform as expected, 
but still ends up anywhere between 60 and 70 at expiration, the profit will be equal 
to the initial credit because both options will expire worthless. However, if the stock 
rallies above 70, unlimited losses are possible because there is a naked call at 70. 
Table 21-4 and Figure 21-2 show the results of this strategy at expiration. 
This is clearly an aggressively bearish strategy. The investor would like to own 
an out-of-the-money put for downside potential. In addition, he sells an out-of-the­
money call, normally for a price greater than that of the purchased put. The call sale 
TABLE 21-4. 
Bearishly split strikes. 
XYZ Price at February 60 February 70 Total 
Expiration Put Profit Call Profit Profit 
50 +$800 +$300 +$1, 100 
55 + 300 + 300 + 600 
60 - 200 + 300 + 100 
65 - 200 + 300 + 100 
70 - 200 + 300 + 100 
75 - 200 - 200 400 
80 - 200 - 700 900 

===== PDF PAGE 364 =====
328 
FIGURE 21-2. 
Bearishly split strikes. 
C 
0 
e ·15. 
X 
w 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
1u +$100 
w $0 I-----------'------ ................. -----
~ 60 
....J 
0 
~ a. 
Stock Price at Expiration 
essentially lets him own the put for free. In fact, he can still make profits even if the 
underlying stock rises slightly or only falls slightly. His risk is realized if the stock rises 
above the striking price of the written call. 
This strategy of splitting the strikes in a bearish manner is used very frequently 
in conjunction with the ownership of common stock. That is, a stock owner who is 
looking to protect his stock will buy an out-of-the-money put and sell an out-of-the­
money call to finance the put purchase. This strategy is called a "protective collar" 
and was discussed in more detail in the chapter on Put Buying in Conjunction with 
Common Stock Ownership. A strategy that is similar to these, but modifies the risk, 
is presented in Chapter 23, Spreads Combining Calls and Puts. 
SUMMARY 
In either of these aggressive strategies, the investor must have a definite opinion 
about the future price movement of the underlying stock. He buys an out-of-the­
money option to provide profit potential for that stock movement. However, an 
investor can lose the entire purchase proceeds of an out-of-the-money option if the 
stock does not perform as expected. An aggressive investor, who has sufficient collat­
eral, might attempt to counteract this effect by also writing an out-of-the-money 
option to cover the cost of the option that he bought. Then, he will not only make 
money if the stock performs as expected, but he will also make money if the stock 
remains relatively unchanged. He will lose quite heavily, however, if the underlying 
stock goes in the opposite direction from his original anticipation. That is why he 
must have a definite opinion on the stock and also be fairly certain of his timing. 

===== PDF PAGE 365 =====
Basic Put Spreads 
Put spreading strategies do not differ substantially in theory from their accompany-
;,,..,,. ,...,,1] v-n..-a<>rl vl-..-al-arriac Rol-h h11llich nnrl hP<>rich nocitionc r>!'.ln hP r>onctn1r>tPrl with .l.J..1.5 V(A,,1.1. .;Jt'.l.'\,.,U'L.L J\...l 1.Vf,A.VoJ• .Jl.,l''\Jl,....t..1. J.J\..1..1..1..1.V.a...._ f.4.1..1..._... ,._,...,_,'-4Ji.A.V..._.,._ ,t'"-"._,..._ ... ...__..._..._...,, .._,.__...,,._ -....,..., _.._,,.._.,....,,...,._ .....,._,_....,,_ , , ,,..._.,._""-
put spreads, as was also the case with call spreads. However, because puts are more 
oriented toward downward stock movement than calls are, some bearish put spread 
strategies are superior to their equivalent bearish call spread strategies. 
The three simplest forms of option spreads· are: 
1. the bull spread, 
2. the bear spread, and 
3. the calendar spread. 
The same types of spreads that were constructed with calls can be established with 
puts, but there are some differences. 
BEAR SPREAD 
In a call bear spread, a call with a lower striking price was sold while a call at a high­
er striking price was bought. Similarly, a put bear spread is established by selling a 
put at a lower strike while buying a put at a higher strike. The put bear spread is a 
debit spread. This is true because a put with a higher striking price will sell for more 
than a put with a lower striking price. Thus, on a stock with both puts and calls trad­
ing, one could set up a bear spread for a credit ( using calls) or alternatively set one 
up for a debit (using puts): 
329 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 25 | PDF PAGES 403-454 =====

===== PDF PAGE 403 =====
CHAPTER 25 
LEAPS 
In an attempt to provide customers with a broader range of derivative products, the 
options exchanges introduced LEAPS. This chapter does a fair amount of reviewing 
basic option facts in order to explain the concepts behind LEAPS. The reader who 
has a knowledge of the preceding chapters and therefore does not need the review 
will be able to quickly skim through this chapter and pick out the strategically impor­
tant points. However, if one encounters concepts here that don't seem familiar, he 
should review the earlier chapter that discusses the pertinent strategy. 
The term LEAPS is a name for "long-term option." A LEAPS is nothing more 
than a listed call or put option that is issued with two or more years of time remain­
ing. It is a longer-term option than we are used to dealing with. Other than that, there 
is no material difference between LEAPS and the other calls and puts that have been 
discussed in the previous chapters. 
LEAPS options were first introduced by the CBOE in October 1990, and were 
offered on a handful of blue-chip stocks. Their attractiveness spurred listings on 
many underlying stocks on all option exchanges as well as on several indices. (Index 
options are covered in a later section of the book.) 
Strategies involving long-term options are not substantially different from those 
involving shorter-term options. However, the fact that the option has so much time 
remaining seems to favor the buyer and be a detriment to the seller. This is one rea­
son why LEAPS have been popular. As a strategist, one knows that the length of time 
remaining has little to do with whether a certain strategy makes sense or not. Rather, 
it is the relative value of the option that dictates strategy. If an option is overpriced, 
it is a viable candidate for selling, whether it has two years of life remaining or two 
months. Obviously, follow-up action may become much more of a necessity during 
the life of a two-year option; that matter is discussed later in this chapter. 
361 

===== PDF PAGE 404 =====
368 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
THE BASICS 
Certain facets of LEAPS are the same as for other listed equity options, while others 
involve slight differences. The amount of standardization is considerably less, which 
makes the simple process of quoting LEAPS a bit more tedious. LEAPS are listed 
options that can be traded in a secondary market or can be exercised before expira­
tion. As with other listed equity options, they do not receive the dividend paid by the 
underlying common stock. 
Recall that four specifications uniquely describe any option contract: 
1. the type (put or call), 
2. the underlying stock name (and symbol), 
3. the expiration date, and 
4. the striking price. 
Type. LEAPS are puts or calls. The LEAPS owner has the right to buy the stock at 
the striking price (LEAPS call) or sell it there (LEAPS put). This is exactly the same 
for LEAPS and for regular equity options. 
Underlying Stock and Quote Symbol. The underlying stocks are the 
same for LEAPS as they are for equity options. The base symbol in an option quote 
is the part that designates the underlying stock. For equity options, the base symbol 
is the same as the stock symbol. However, until the Option Price Reporting Authority 
( OPRA) changes the way that all options are quoted, the base symbols for LEAPS are 
not the same as the stock symbols. For example, LEAPS options on stock XYZ might 
trade under the base symbol WXY; so it is possible that one stock might have listed 
options trading with different base symbols even though all the symbols refer to the 
same underlying stock. Check with your broker to determine the LEAPS symbol if 
you need to know it. 
Expiration Date. LEAPS expire on the Saturday following the third Friday of 
the expiration month, just as equity options do. One must look in the newspaper, ask 
his broker, or check the Internet (www.cboe.com) to determine what the expiration 
months are, however, since they are also not completely standardized. When LEAPS 
were first listed, there were differing expiration months through December 1993. At 
the current time, LEAPS are issued to expire in January of each year, so some 
attempt is being made at standardization. However, there is no guarantee that vary­
ing expiration months won't reappear at some future time. 

===== PDF PAGE 405 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 369 
Striking Price. There is no standardized striking price interval for LEAPS as 
there is for equity options. If XYZ is a 95-dollar stock, there might be LEAPS with 
striking prices of 80, 95, and 105. Again, one must look in the newspaper, ask his bro­
ker, or check the Internet (www.cboe.com) to determine the actual LEAPS striking 
prices for any specific underlying stock. New striking prices can be introduced when 
the underlying stock rises or falls too far. For example, if the lowest strike for XYZ 
were 80 and the stock fell to 80, a new LEAPS strike of 70 might be introduced. 
Other Basic Factors. LEAPS may be exercised at any time during their life, 
just as is the case with equity options. Note that this statement regarding exercise is 
not necessarily true for Index LEAPS or Index Options. See Part V of this book for 
discussions of index products. 
Standard LEAPS contracts are for 100 shares of the underlying stock, just as 
equity options are. The number of shares would be adjusted for stock splits and stock 
dividends (leading to even more arcane LEAPS symbol problems). LEAPS are quot­
ed on a per-share basis, as are other listed options. 
There are position and exercise limits for LEAPS just as there are for other list­
ed options. One must add his LEAPS position and his regular equity option position 
together in order to determine his entire position quantity. Exemptions may be 
obtained for bona fide hedgers of common stock. 
As time passes, LEAPS eventually have less than 9 months remaining until expi­
ration. When such a time is reached, the LEAPS are "renamed" and become ordi­
nary equity options on the underlying security. 
Example: Assume LEAPS on stock XYZ were initially issued to expire two years 
hence. Assume that one of these LEAPS is the XYZ January 90; that is, it has a strik­
ing price of 90 and expires in January, two years from now. Its symbol is WXYAR 
(WXY being the LEAPS base symbol assigned by the exchange where XYZ is traded, 
A for January, and R for 90). 
Fifteen months later, the January LEAPS only have 9 months of life remaining. 
The LEAPS symbol would be changed from WXYAR to XYZAR (a regular equity 
option), and the quotes would be listed in the regular equity option section of the 
newspaper instead of in the LEAPS section. 
PRICING LEAPS 
Terms such as in-the-money, out-of-the-money, intrinsic value, time value premium, 
and parity all apply and have the same definitions. The factors influencing the prices 
of LEAPS are the same as those for any other option: 

===== PDF PAGE 406 =====
370 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
1. underlying stock price, 
2. striking price, 
3. time remaining, 
4. volatility, 
5. risk-free interest rate, and 
6. dividend rate. 
The relative influence of these factors may be a little more pronounced for 
LEAPS than it is for shorter-term equity options. Consequently, the trader may think 
that a LEAPS is overly expensive or cheap by inspection, when in reality it is not. One 
should be careful in his evaluation of LEAPS until he has acquired experience in 
observing how their prices relate to the shorter-tenn equity options with which he is 
experienced. 
It might prove useful to reexamine the option pricing curve with some LEAPS 
included. Please refer to Figure 25-1 for the pricing curves of several options. As 
always, the solid intrinsic value line is the bottom line; it is the same for any call 
option. The curves are all drawn with the same values for the pertinent variables: 
stock price, striking price, volatility, short-term interest rate, and dividends. Thus, 
they can be compared directly. 
The most obvious thing to notice about the curves in Figure 25-1 is that the 
curve depicting the 2-year LEAPS is quite flat. It has the general shape of the 
shorter-term curves, but there is so much time value at stock prices even 25% in­
or out-of-the-money, that the 2-year curve is much flatter than the others. 
Other observations can be made as well. Notice the at-the-money options: The 
2-year LEAPS sells for a little more than four times the 3-month option. As we shall 
see, this can change with the effects of interest rates and dividends, but it confirms 
something that was demonstrated earlier: Time decay is not linear. Thus, the 2-year 
LEAPS, which has eight times the amount of time remaining as compared to the 3-
month call, only sells for about four times as much. This LEAPS might appear cheap 
to the casual observer, but remember that these graphs depict the fair values for this 
set of input parameters. Do not be deluded into thinking that a LEAPS looks cheap 
merely by comparing its price to a nearer-term option; use a model to evaluate it, or 
at least use the output of someone else's model. 
The curves in Figure 25-1 depict the relationships between stock price, striking 
price, and time remaining. The most important remaining determinant of an option's 
price is the volatility of the underlying stock. Changes in volatility can greatly change 
the price of any option. This is especially true for LEAPS, since a long-term option's 
price will fluctuate greatly when volatility changes only a little. Some observations on 
the differing effects that volatility changes have on short- and long-term options are 
presented later. 

===== PDF PAGE 407 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 
FIGURE 25-1. 
LEAPS call pricing curve. 
45 
40 
35 
Q) 30 .g 
o. 25 
'lii U 20 
15 
10 
5 
, .... ,, 
Various Expiration Dates 
Strike= 80 
2 Years (LEAP) , ' 
' ,,,,' 
,, ,, 
,, ,, ,, 
"' ,, ,, ,, ,, 
,,' ,, 
,. ,, ,, 
0 L----~==--..l.---..J£----1.---L----.I....--
60 70 80 90 100 110 
Stock Price 
371 
Before that discussion, however, it may be beneficial to examine the effects that 
interest rates and dividends can have on LEAPS. These effects are much, much 
greater than those on conventional equity options. Recall that it was stated that inter­
est rates and dividends are minor determinants in the price of an option, unless the 
dividends were large. That statement pertains mostly to short-term options. For 
longer-term options such as LEAPS, the cumulative effect of an interest rate or div­
idend over such a long period of time can have a magnified effect in terms of the 
absolute price of the option. 
Figure 25-2 presents the option pricing curve again, but the only option depict­
ed is a 2-year LEAPS. The striking price is 100, and the straight line at the right 
depicts the intrinsic value of the LEAPS. The three curves represent option prices 
for risk-free interest rates of 3%, 6%, and 9%. All other factors (time to expiration, 
volatility, and dividends) are fixed. The difference between option prices caused 
merely by a shift in rates of 3% is very large. 
The difference in LEAPS prices increases as the LEAPS becomes in-the­
money. Note that in this figure, the distance between the curves gets wider as one 
scans them from left to right. The price difference for out-of-the-money LEAPS is 
large enough- nearly a point even for options fairly far out-of-the-money (that is, the 
points on the left-hand side of the graph). A shift of 3% in rates causes a larger price 
difference of over 2 points in the at-the-money, 2-year LEAPS. The largest differen­
tial in option prices occurs in-the-rrwney ! This may seem somewhat illogical, but 
when LEAPS strategies are examined later, the reasons for this will become clear. 

===== PDF PAGE 408 =====
372 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Suffice it to say that the in-the-money LEAPS are changed in price by over 4 points 
when rates change by 3%. That is a monstrous differential and should cause any trad­
er who is considering trading in-the-money LEAPS to consider what his outlook is 
for short-term interest rates. 
There is always a substantial probability that rates can change by 3% in two 
years. Thus, it is difficult to predict with any certainty what risk-free rate to use in the 
pricing of two-year LEAPS. Moreover, one should be very careful when deciding 
LEAPS are "cheap" or "expensive" because, conventionally, the short-term interest 
rate is not usually considered as a significant factor in making such an analysis. For 
LEAPS, however, Figure 25-2 is obvious proof that interest rate considerations are 
important for LEAPS traders. 
Now consider dividends. Figure 25-3 depicts the prices of two-year LEAPS 
calls. The three curves on the graph are for different dividend rates - the top line 
representing the current rate, the middle line representing prices if the dividend 
were raised by $1 annually, and the bottom line showing what prices would be if 
the dividend were raised by $2 annually. All other factors (volatility, time remain­
ing, and risk-free interest rates) are the same for each curve in this graph. The 
increase in dividends manifests itself by decreasing the LEAPS call price. The rea­
son that this is true, of course, is that the stock will be reduced in price more when 
it goes ex-dividend by the larger amounts of the increased dividends. 
FIGURE 25-2. 
2-year LEAPS call pricing curve, interest rate comparison. 
35 
30 
25 
Q) 
(.) 
~ 20 
C: 
0 
a 15 0 
10 
5 
Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 409 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 
FIGURE 25-3. 
LEAPS call pricing curve as dividends increase. 
30 
25 
(I) 
.g 20 
0.. 
C: 
:g_ 15 
0 
10 
5 
0 
70 80 90 100 
Stock Price 
With 
Current 
Dividend 
110 
373 
Dividend 
)> Increases 
$1 
T Increases 
$2 
120 
The actual amount that the LEAPS calls lose in price increases slightly as the 
call is more in-the-money. That is, the curves are closer together on the left-hand 
(out-of-the-money) side than they are on the right-hand (in-the-money) side. For the 
in-the-money call, a $1 increase in dividends over two years can cause the LEAPS to 
be worth about 1 ½ points less in value. 
Figure 25-3 is to the same scale as Figure 25-2, so they can be compared direct­
ly in terms of magnitude. Notice that the effect of a $1 increase in dividends on the 
LEAPS call prices is much smaller than that of an increase in interest rates by 3%. 
Graphically speaking, one can observe this by noting that the spaces between the 
three curves in the previous figure are much wider than the spaces between the three 
curves in this figure. 
Finally, note that dividend increases have the opposite effect on puts. That is, 
an increase in the dividend payout of the underlying common will cause a put to 
increase in price. If the put is a long-term LEAPS put, then the effect of the increase 
will be even larger. 
Lest one think that LEAPS are too difficult to price objectively, note the follow­
ing. The prior figures of interest rate and dividend effects tend to magnify the effects 
on LEAPS prices for two reasons. First, they depict the effects on 2-year LEAPS. That 
is a large amount of life for LEAPS. Many LEAPS have less life remaining, so the 
effects would be diminished somewhat for LEAPS with 10 to 23 months of life left. 

===== PDF PAGE 410 =====
374 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Second, the figures depict the change in rates or dividends as being instantaneous. 
This is not completely realistic. If rates change, they will change by a little bit at a time, 
usually¼% or½% at a time, perhaps as much as 1 %. If dividends are increased, that 
increase may be instantaneous, but it will not likely occur immediately after the 
LEAPS are purchased or sold. However, the point that these figures are meant to con­
vey is that interest rates and dividends have a much greater effect on LEAPS than on 
ordinary shorter-term equity options, and that is certainly a true statement. 
COMPARING LEAPS AND SHORT-TERM OPTIONS 
Table 25-1 will help to illustrate the problem in valuing LEAPS, either mentally or 
with a model. All of the variables - stock price, volatility, interest rates, and dividends 
- are given in increments and the comparison is shown between 3-month equity 
options and 2-year LEAPS. There are three sets of comparisons: for options 20% out­
of-the-money, options at-the-money, and options 20% in-the-money. 
A few words are needed here to explain how volatility is shown in this table. 
Volatility is normally expressed as a percent. The volatility of the stock market is 
about 15%. The table shows what would happen if volatility changed by one per­
centage point, to 16%, for example. Of course, the table also shows what would hap­
pen if the other factors changed by a small amount. 
Most of the discrepancies between the 3-month and the 2-year options are 
large. For example, if volatility increases by one percentage point, the 3-month out­
of-the-money call will increase in price by only 3 cents (0.03 in the left-hand column) 
while the 2-year LEAPS call will increase by 43 cents. As another example, look at 
the bottom right-hand pair of numbers, which show the effect of a dividend increase 
on the options that are 20% in-the-money. The assumption is that the dividend will 
increase 25 cents this quarter (and will be 25 cents higher every quarter thereafter). 
This translates into a loss of 14 cents for the 3-month call, since there is only one ex­
dividend period that affects this call; but it translates into a loss of 1 ½ for the 2-year 
LEAPS, since the stock will go ex-dividend by an extra $2 over the life of that call. 
TABLE 25-1. 
Comparing LEAPS and Short-Term Calls. 
Change in Price of the Options 
20% out at 20% in 
Variable Increment 3-mo. 2-yr. 3-mo. 2-yr. 3-mo. 2-yr . 
Stock Pre. + 1 pt . 03 .41 .54 .70 .97 .89 
Volatility + 1% .03 .43 .21 .48 .04 .33 
Int. Rate + 1/2% .01 .27 .08 .55 .14 .72 
Dividend + $.25/qtr 0 -.62 -.08 -1.18 -.14 -1.50 

===== PDF PAGE 411 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 375 
The table also shows that only three of the discrepancies are not large. Two 
involve the stock price change. If the stock changes in price by 1 point, neither the at­
the-money nor the in-the-money options behave very differently, although the at-the­
money LEAPS do jump by 70 cents. The observant reader will notice that the top line 
of the table depicts the delta of the options in question; it shows the change in option 
price for a one-point change in stock price. The only other comparison that is not 
extremely divergent is that of volatility change for the at-the-money option. The 3-
month call changes by 21 cents while the LEAPS changes by nearly ½ point. This is 
still a factor of two-to-one, but is much less than the other comparisons in the table. 
Study the other comparisons in the table. The trader who is used to dealing with 
short-term options might ordinarily ignore the effect of a rise in interest rates of ½ 
of 1 %, of a 25-cent increase in the quarterly dividend, of the volatility increasing by 
a mere 1 %, or maybe even of the stock moving by one point (only if his option is out­
of-the-money). The LEAPS option trader will gain or suffer substantially and imme­
diately if any of these occur. In almost every case, his LEAPS call will gain or lose ½ 
point of value - a significant amount, to be sure. 
LEAPS STRATEGIES 
Many of the strategies involving LEAPS are not significantly different from their 
counterparts that involve short-term options. However, as shown earlier, the long­
term nature of the LEAPS can sometimes cause the strategist to experience a result 
different from that to which he has become accustomed. 
As a general rule, one would want to be a buyer of LEAPS when interest rates 
were low and when the volatilities being implied in the marketplace are low. If the 
opposite were true (high rates and high volatilities), he would lean toward strategies 
in which the sale of LEAPS is used. Of course, there are many other specific consid­
erations when it comes to operating a strategy, but since the long-term nature of 
LEAPS exposes one to interest rate and volatility movements for such a long time, 
one may as well attempt to position himself favorably with respect to those two ele­
ments when he enters a position. 
LEAPS AS STOCK SUBSTITUTE 
Any in-the-money option can be used as a substitute for the underlying stock. Stock 
owners may be able to substitute a long in-the-money call for their long stock. Short 
sellers of stock may be able to substitute a long put for their short stock. This is not 
a new idea; it was discussed briefly in Chapter 3 under reasons why people buy calls. 
It has been available as a strategy for some time with short-term options. Its attrac­
tiveness seems to have increased somewhat with the introduction of LEAPS, howev-

===== PDF PAGE 412 =====
374 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Second, the figures depict the change in rates or dividends as being instantaneous. 
This is not completely realistic. If rates change, they will change by a little bit at a time, 
usually¼% or ½% at a time, perhaps as much as 1 %. If dividends are increased, that 
increase may be instantaneous, but it will not likely occur immediately after the 
LEAPS are purchased or sold. However, the point that these figures are meant to con­
vey is that interest rates and dividends have a much greater effect on LEAPS than on 
ordinary shorter-term equity options, and that is certainly a true statement. 
COMPARING LEAPS AND SHORT-TERM OPTIONS 
Table 25-1 will help to illustrate the problem in valuing LEAPS, either mentally or 
with a model. All of the variables - stock price, volatility, interest rates, and dividends 
- are given in increments and the comparison is shown between 3-month equity 
options and 2-year LEAPS. There are three sets of comparisons: for options 20% out­
of-the-money, options at-the-money, and options 20% in-the-money. 
A few words are needed here to explain how volatility is shown in this table. 
Volatility is normally expressed as a percent. The volatility of the stock market is 
about 15%. The table shows what would happen if volatility changed by one per­
centage point, to 16%, for example. Of course, the table also shows what would hap­
pen if the other factors changed by a small amount. 
Most of the discrepancies between the 3-month and the 2-year options are 
large. For example, if volatility increases by one percentage point, the 3-month out­
of-the-money call will increase in price by only 3 cents (0.03 in the left-hand column) 
while the 2-year LEAPS call will increase by 43 cents. As another example, look at 
the bottom right-hand pair of numbers, which show the effect of a dividend increase 
on the options that are 20% in-the-money. The assumption is that the dividend will 
increase 25 cents this quarter ( and will be 25 cents higher every quarter thereafter). 
This translates into a loss of 14 cents for the 3-month call, since there is only one ex­
dividend period that affects this call; but it translates into a loss of 1 ½ for the 2-year 
LEAPS, since the stock will go ex-dividend by an extra $2 over the life of that call. 
TABLE 25-1. 
Comparing LEAPS and Short-Term Calls. 
Change in Price of the Options 
20% out al 20% in 
Variable Increment 3-mo. 2-yr. 3-mo. 2-yr. 3-mo. 2-yr. 
Stock Pre. + 1 pt .03 .41 .54 .70 .97 .89 
Volatility + 1% .03 .43 .21 .48 .04 .33 
Int. Rate + 1/2% .01 .27 .08 .55 .14 .72 
Dividend + $.25/qtr 0 -.62 -.08 - l.18 -.14 -1.50 

===== PDF PAGE 413 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 375 
The table also shows that only three of the discrepancies are not large. Two 
involve the stock price change. If the stock changes in price by 1 point, neither the at­
the-money nor the in-the-money options behave very differently, although the at-the­
money LEAPS do jump by 70 cents. The observant reader will notice that the top line 
of the table depicts the delta of the options in question; it shows the change in option 
price for a one-point change in stock price. The only other comparison that is not 
extremely divergent is that of volatility change for the at-the-money option. The 3-
month call changes by 21 cents while the LEAPS changes by nearly ½ point. This is 
still a factor of two-to-one, but is much less than the other comparisons in the table. 
Study the other comparisons in the table. The trader who is used to dealing with 
short-term options might ordinarily ignore the effect of a rise in interest rates of½ 
of 1 %, of a 25-cent increase in the quarterly dividend, of the volatility increasing by 
a mere 1 %; or maybe even of the stock moving by one point (only if his option is out­
of-the-money). The LEAPS option trader will gain or suffer substantially and imme­
diately if any of these occur. In almost every case, his LEAPS call will gain or lose ½ 
point of value - a significant amount, to be sure. 
LEAPS STRATEGIES 
Many of the strategies involving LEAPS are not significantly different from their 
counterparts that involve short-term options. However, as shown earlier, the long­
term nature of the LEAPS can sometimes cause the strategist to experience a result 
different from that to which he has become accustomed. 
As a general rule, one would want to be a buyer of LEAPS when interest rates 
were low and when the volatilities being implied in the marketplace are low. If the 
opposite were true (high rates and high volatilities), he would lean toward strategies 
in which the sale of LEAPS is used. Of course, there are many other specific consid­
erations when it comes to operating a strategy, but since the long-term nature of 
LEAPS exposes one to interest rate and volatility movements for such a long time, 
one may as well attempt to position himself favorably with respect to those two ele­
ments when he enters a position. 
LEAPS AS STOCK SUBSTITUTE 
Any in-the-money option can be used as a substitute for the underlying stock. Stock 
owners may be able to substitute a long in-the-money call for their long stock. Short 
sellers of stock may be able to substitute a long put for their short stock. This is not 
a new idea; it was discussed briefly in Chapter 3 under reasons why people buy calls. 
It has been available as a strategy for some time with short-term options. Its attrac­
tiveness seems to have increased somewhat with the introduction of LEAPS, howev-

===== PDF PAGE 414 =====
376 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
er. More and more people are examining the potential of selling the stock they own 
and buying long-term calls (LEAPS) as a substitute, or buying LEAPS instead of 
making an initial purchase in a particular common stock. 
Substitution for Stock Currently Held Long. Simplistically, this strate­
gy involves this line of thinking: If one owns stock and sells it, an investor could rein­
vest a small portion of the proceeds in a call option, thereby providing continued 
upside profit potential if the stock rises in price, and invest the rest in a bank to earn 
interest. The interest earned would act as a substitute for the dividend, if any, to 
which the investor is no longer entitled. Moreover, he has less downside risk: If the 
stock should fall dramatically, his loss is limited to the initial cost of the call. 
In actual practice, one should carefully calculate what he is getting and what he 
is giving up. For example, is the loss of the dividend too great to be compensated for 
by the investment of the excess proceeds? How much of the potential gain will be 
wasted in the form of time value premium paid for the call? The costs to the stock 
owner who decides to switch into call options as a substitute are commissions, the 
time value premium of the call, and the loss of dividends. The benefits are the inter­
est that can be earned from freeing up a substantial portion of his funds, plus the fact 
that there is less downside risk in owning the call than in owning the stock. 
Example: XYZ is selling at 50. There are one-year LEAPS with a striking price of 40 
that sell for $12. XYZ pays an annual dividend of $0.50 and short-term interest rates 
are 5%. What are the economics that an owner of 100 XYZ common stock must cal­
culate in order to determine whether it is viable to sell his stock and buy the one-year 
LEAPS as a substitute? 
The call has time value premium of 2 points (40 + 12 - 50). Moreover, if the 
stock is sold and the LEAPS purchased, a credit of $3,800 less commissions would 
be generated. First, calculate the net credit generated: 
Credit balance generated: 
Sale of 1 00 XYZ stock 
Less stock commission 
Net sale proceeds: 
Cost of one LEAPS call 
Plus option commission 
Net cost of call: 
Total credit balance: 
$5,000 
25 
$4,975 credit 
$3,760 credit 
$1,200 
15 
$1,215 debit 
Now the costs and benefits of making the switch can be computed: 

===== PDF PAGE 415 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 
Costs of switching: 
Time value premium 
Loss of dividend 
Stock commissions 
Option commissions 
Total cost: 
Fixed benefit from switching: 
Interest earned on 
credit balance of $3,760 
at 5% interest for one year= 0.05 x $3,760: 
Net cost of switching: 
317 
-$200 
-$ 50 
-$ 25 
- .l__Ll_ 
-$290 
+ $188 
- $102 
The stock owner must now decide if it is worth just over $1 per share in order 
to have his downside risk limited to a price of 39½ over the next year. The price of 
39½ as his downside risk is merely the amount of the net credit he received from 
doing the switch ($3,760) plus the interest earned ($188), expressed in per-share 
terms. That is, if XYZ falls dramatically over the next year and the LEAPS expires 
worthless, this investor will still have $3,948 in a bank account. That is equivalent to 
limiting his risk to about 39½ on the original 100 shares. 
If the investor decides to make the substitution, he should invest the proceeds 
from the sale in a 1-year CD or Treasury bill, for two reasons. First, he locks in the 
current rate - the one used in his calculations - for the year. Second, he is not tempt­
ed to use the money for something else, an action that might negate the potential 
benefits of the substitution. 
The above calculations all assume that the LEAPS call or the stock would have 
been held for the full year. If that is known not to be the case, the appropriate costs 
or benefits must be recalculated. 
Caveats. This ($102) seems like a reasonably small price to pay to make the switch 
from common stock to call ownership. However, if the investor were planning to sell 
the stock before it fell to 39½ in any case, he might not feel the need to pay for this 
protection. (Be aware, however, that he could accomplish essentially the same thing, 
since he can sell his LEAPS call whenever he wants to.) Moreover, when the year is 
up, he will have to pay another stock commission to repurchase his XYZ common if 
he still wants to own it ( or he will have to pay two option commissions to roll his long 
call out to a later expiration date). One other detriment that might exist, although a 
relatively unlikely one, is that the underlying common might declare an increased 
dividend or, even worse, a special cash dividend. The LEAPS call owner would not 
be entitled to that dividend increase in whatever form, while, obviously, the common 

===== PDF PAGE 416 =====
378 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
stock owner would have been. If the company declared a stock dividend, it would 
have no effect on this strategy since the call owner is entitled to those. A change in 
interest rates is not a factor either, since the owner of the LEAPS should invest in a 
1-year Treasury bill or a 1-year CD and therefore would not be subject to interim 
changes in short-term interest rates. 
There may be other mitigating circumstances. Mostly these would involve tax 
considerations. If the stock is currently a profitable investment, the sale would gen­
erate a capital gain, and taxes might be owed. If the stock is currently being held at 
a loss, the purchase of the call would constitute a wash sale and the loss could not be 
taken at this time. (See Chapter 41 on taxes for a broader discussion of the wash sale 
rule and option trading.) 
In tl1eory, the calculations above could produce an overall credit, in which case the 
stockholder W(?uld normally want to substitute with the call, unless he has overriding tax 
considerations or suspects that a cash dividend increase is going to be announced. Be 
very careful about switching if this situation should arise. Normally, arbitrageurs - per­
sons trading for exchange members and paying no commission - would take advantage 
of such a situation before the general public could. If they are letting the opportunity 
pass by, there must be a reason (probably the cash dividend), so be extremely certain of 
your economics and research before venturing into such a situation. 
In summary, holders of common stock on which there exist in-the-money 
LEAPS should evaluate the economics of substituting the LEAPS call for the com­
mon stock. Even if arithmetic calculations call for the substitution, the stockholder 
should consider his tax situation as well as his outlook for the cash dividends to be 
paid by the common before making the switch. 
BUYING LEAPS AS THE INITIAL PURCHASE 
INSTEAD OF BUYING A COMMON STOCK 
Logic similar to that used earlier to determine whether a stockholder might want to 
substitute a LEAPS call for his stock can be used by a prospective purchaser of com­
mon stock. In other words, this investor does not already own the common. He is 
going to buy it. This prospective purchaser might want to buy a LEAPS call and put 
the rest of the money he had planned to use in the bank, instead of actually buying 
the stock itself. 
His costs - real and opportunity - are calculated in a similar manner to those 
expressed earlier. The only real difference is that he has to spend the stock commis­
sion in this case, whereas he did not in the previous example (since he already owned 
the stock). 

===== PDF PAGE 417 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 379 
Example: As before, XYZ is selling at 50; there are 1-year LEAPS with a striking 
price of 40 that sell for $12; XYZ pays an annual dividend of $0.50, and short-term 
interest rates are 5%. 
The initial purchaser of common stock would have certain "opportunity" costs 
and savings if he decided instead to buy the LEAPS calls. First, calculate the differ­
ence in investment required for the stock versus the LEAPS: 
Costs: 
Prospective initial investment: 
Stock: $5,000 + $25 commission 
LEAPS: $1,200 + $15 commission 
Net difference: 
Now calculate the costs versus the savings: 
Time value premium 
Loss of dividend 
Savings: 
Interest on $3, 810 for one year at 5%: 
Net opportunity cost: 
$5,025 
$1,215 
$3,810 
-$200 
-$ 50 
+$190 
-$ 60 
In this case, it seems even more likely that the prospective stock purchaser 
would instead buy the LEAPS call. His net "cost" of doing so, provided he puts the 
difference in initial investment in a 1-year CD or Treasury bill, is only $60. For this 
small amount, he has all the upside appreciation ( except $60 worth), but has risk only 
down to 40 (he will have $4,000 in his bank account at the end of one year even if the 
LEAPS expire worthless). 
This strategy of buying in-the-money LEAPS and putting the difference 
between the LEAPS cost and the stock cost in an interest-bearing instrument is an 
attractive one. It might seem it would be especially attractive if interest rates for the 
differential were high. Unfortunately, those high rates would present something of a 
catch-22 because, as was shown earlier, higher rates will cause the LEAPS to be more 
expensive. 
In this margin strategy, one has the risk of not participating in cash dividend 
increases or specials as the stockholder who substitutes does. But the other concerns 
of the stockholder, such as taxes, are not pertinent here. Again, these specific calcu­
lations only apply if the stock were to be held for the entire year. Adjustments would 
have to be made if the holding period envisioned is shorter. 

===== PDF PAGE 418 =====
380 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Using Margin. The same prospective initial purchaser of common stock might 
have been contemplating the purchase of the stock on margin. If he used the LEAPS 
instead, he could save the margin interest. Of course, he wouldn't have as much 
money to put in the bank, but he should also compare his costs against those of buy­
ing the LEAPS call instead. 
Example: As before, XYZ is selling at 50; there are 1-year LEAPS with a striking 
price of 40 that sell for $12; XYZ pays an annual dividend of $0.50; and short-term 
interest rates are 5%. Furthermore, assume the margin rate is 8% on borrowed debit 
balances. 
First, calculate the difference in prospective investments: 
Cost of buying the stock: 
$5,000 + $25 commission: 
Amount borrowed (50%) 
Equity required 
Cost of buying LEAPS: 
$1,200 + $15 commission: 
Difference (available to be placed in bank account) 
$5,025 
-2,512 
$2,513 
$1,215 
$1,298 
Now the costs and opportunities can be compared, if it is assumed that he buys 
the LEAPS: 
Costs: 
Time value premium 
Dividend loss 
Savings: 
Interest on $1,298 at 5% 
Margin interest on $2,512 debit balance at 8% for one year 
Net Savings: 
-$200 
- 50 
+$ 65 
+ 201 
+$ 16 
For the prospective margin buyer, there is a real savings in this example. The 
fact that he does not have to pay the margin interest on his debit balance makes the 
purchase of the LEAPS call a cost-saving alternative. Finally, it should be noted that 
current margin rules allow one to purchase a LEAPS option on margin. That can be 
accounted for in the above calculations as well; merely reduce the investment 
required and increase the margin charges on the debit balance. 

===== PDF PAGE 419 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 381 
In summary, a prospective purchaser of common stock may often find that if 
there is an in-the-money option available, the purchase of that option is more attrac­
tive than buying the common stock itself. If he were planning to buy on margin, it is 
even more likely that the LEAPS purchase will be attractive. The main drawback is 
that he will not participate if cash dividends are increased or a special dividend is 
declared. Read on, however, because the next strategy may be better than the one 
above. 
PROTECTING EXISTING STOCK HOLDINGS WITH LEAPS PUTS 
What was accomplished in the substitution strategy previously discussed? The stock 
owner paid some cost ($102 in the actual example) in order to limit the risk of his 
stock ownership to a price of 39½. What if he had bought a LEAPS put instead? 
Forgetting the price of the put for a moment, concentrate on what the strategy would 
accomplish. He would be protected from a large loss on the downside since he owns 
the put, and he could participate in upside appreciation since he still owns the stock. 
Isn't this what the substitution strategy was trying to accomplish? Yes, it is. In this 
strategy, only one commission is paid- that being on a fairly cheap out-of-the-money 
LEAPS put - and there is no risk of losing out on dividend increases or special divi­
dends. 
The comparison between substituting a call or buying a put is a relatively sim­
ple one. First, do the calculations as they were performed in the initial example 
above. That example showed that the stockholder's cost would be $102 to substitute 
the LEAPS call for the stock, and such a substitution would protect him at a price of 
39½. In effect, he is paying $152 for a LEAPS put with a strike of 40- the $102 cost 
plus the difference between 40 and the 39½ protection price. Now, if an XYZ 1-year 
LEAPS put with strike 40 were available at 1 ½, he could accomplish everything he 
had initially wanted merely by buying the put. 
Moreover, he would save commissions and still be in a position to participate 
in increased cash dividends. These additional benefits should make the put worth 
even more to the stockholder, so that he might pay even slightly more than 1 ½ for 
the put. If the LEAPS put were available at this price, it would clearly be the bet­
ter choice and should be bought instead of substituting the LEAPS call for the com­
mon stock. 
Thus, any stockholder who is thinking of protecting his position can do it in one 
of two ways: Sell the stock and substitute a call, or continue to hold his stock and buy 
a put to protect it. LEAPS calls and puts are amenable to this strategy. Because of 
the LEAPS' long-term nature, one does not have to keep reestablishing his position 
and pay numerous commissions, as he would with short-term options. The stock­
holder should perform the simple calculations as shown above in order to decide 

===== PDF PAGE 420 =====
382 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
whether the move is feasible at all, and if it is, whether to use the call substitution 
strategy or the put protection strategy. 
LEAPS INSTEAD OF SHORT STOCK 
Just as in-the-money LEAPS calls may sometimes be a smarter purchase than the 
stock itself, in-the-money puts may sometimes be a better purchase than shorting the 
common stock. Recall that either the put purchase or the short sale of stock is a bear­
ish strategy, generally implemented by someone who expects the stock to decline in 
price. The strategist knows, however, that short stock is a component of many strate­
gies and might reflect other opinions than pure bearishness on the common. In any 
case, an in-the-money put may prove to be a viable substitute for shorting the stock 
itself. The two main advantages that the put owner has are that he has limited risk 
(whereas the short seller of stock has theoretically unlimited risk); and he does not 
have to pay out any dividends on the underlying stock as the short seller would. Also, 
the commissions for buying the put would normally be smaller than those required 
to sell the stock short. 
There is not much in the way of calculating that needs to be done in order to 
make the comparison between buying the in-the-money put and shorting the stock. 
If the time value premium spent is small in comparison \vith the dividend payout that 
is saved, then the put is probably the better choice. 
Professional arbitrageurs and other exchange members, as well as some large 
customers, receive interest on their short sales. For these traders, the put would have 
to be trading with virtually no time premium at all in order for the comparison to 
favor the put purchase over the stock short sale. However, the public customer who 
is going to be shorting stock should be aware of the potential for buying an in-the­
money put instead. 
SPECULATIVE OPTION BUYING WITH LEAPS 
Strategists know that buying calls and puts can have various applications; witness the 
stock substitution strntegies above. However, the most popular reason for buying 
options is for speculative gain. The leverage inherent in owning options and their lim­
ited risk feature make them attractive for this purpose as well. The risk, of course, 
can be 100% of the investment, and time decay works against the option owner as 
well. LEAPS calls and puts fit all of these descriptions; they simply have longer matu­
rities. 
Time decay is the major enemy of the speculative option holder. Purchasing 
LEAPS options instead of the shorter-term equity options generally exposes the 

===== PDF PAGE 421 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 383 
buyer to less risk of time decay on a daily basis. This is true because the extreme neg­
ative effects of time decay magnify as the option approaches its expiration. Recall that 
it was shown in Chapter 3 that time decay is not linear: An option decays more rap­
idly at the end of its life than at the beginning. Eventually, a LEAPS put or call will 
become a normal short-term equity option and time will begin to take a more rapid 
toll. But in the beginning of the life of LEAPS, there is so much time remaining that 
the short-term decay is not large in terms of price. 
Table 25-2 and Figure 25-4 depict the rate of decay of two options: one is at­
the-money (the lower curve) and the other is 20% out-of-the-money (the upper 
curve). The horizontal axis is months of life remaining until expiration. The vertical 
axis is the percent of the option price that is lost daily due to time decay. The options 
that qualify as LEAPS are ones with more than 9 months oflife remaining, and would 
thus be the ones on the lower right-hand part of the graph. 
The upward-sloping nature of both curves as time to expiration wanes shows 
that time decay increases more rapidly as expiration approaches. Notice how much 
more rapidly the out-of-the-money option decays, percentagewise, than the at-the­
money. LEAPS, however, do not decay much at all compared to normal equity 
options. Most LEAPS, even the out-of-the-money ones, lose less than¼ of one per­
cent of their value daily. This is a pittance when compared with a 6-month equity 
option that is 20% out-of-the-money- that option loses well over 1 % of its value daily 
and it still has 6 months of life remaining. 
From the accompanying table, observe that the out-of-the-money 2-month 
option loses over 4% of its value daily! 
Thus, LEAPS do not decay at a rapid rate. This gives the LEAPS holder a 
chance to have his opinion about the stock price work for him without having to 
worry as much about the passage of time as the average equity option holder would. 
An advantage of owning LEAPS, therefore, is that one's timing of the option pur­
chase does not have to be as exact as that for shorter-term option buying. This can be 
a great psychological advantage as well as a strategic advantage. The LEAPS option 
buyer who feels strongly that the stock will move in the desired direction has the lux­
ury of being able to wait calmly for the anticipated move to take place. If it does not, 
even in perhaps as long as 6 months' time, he may still be able to recoup a reason­
able portion of his initial purchase price because of the slow percentage rate of decay. 
Do not be deluded into believing that LEAPS don't decay at all. Although the 
rate of decay is slow (as shown previously), an option that is losing 0.15% of its value 
daily will still lose about 25% of its value in six months. 
Example: XYZ is at 60 and there are 18-month LEAPS calls selling for $8, with a 
striking price of 60. The daily decay of this call with respect to time will be minus-

===== PDF PAGE 422 =====
384 
TABLE 25-2. 
Daily percent time value decay. 
Months remaining At-the-money 
24 .12 
18 .14 
12 .19 
9 .22 
6 .27 
3 .60 
2 .73 
1.27 
2 wks 3.33 
FIGURE 25-4. 
Daily percent time value decay. 
125 
100 
20% Out-of-the-Money 
0 
0 
~ 
~ 75 -
~ 
0 
c @ 50 
8: 
25 
0 
3 
At-the-Money 
6 9 12 15 
Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Percent Decay 
20% Out-of-the-money 
.18 
.27 
.55 
.76 
1.18 
3.57 
4.43 
LEAPS 
18 21 24 
Months Remaining 
cule; it will take about a week for even an eighth of a point to be lost due to time. 
However, if the option is held for six months and nothing else happens, the LEAPS 
call will be selling for about 6. Thus, it will have lost 25% of its value if the stock 
remains around 60 at the end of six months. 

===== PDF PAGE 423 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 385 
Those familiar with holding equity calls and puts are more accustomed to seeing 
an option lose 25% of its value in possibly as little as four or five weeks' time. Thus, the 
advantage of holding the LEAPS is obvious from the viewpoint of slower time decay. 
This observation leads to the obvious question: "When is the best time to sell my 
call and repurchase a longer-term one?" Referring again to the figure above may help 
answer the question. Note that for the at-the-money option, the curve begins to bend 
dramatically upward soon after the 6-month time barrier is passed. Thus, it seems log­
ical that to minimize the effects of time decay, all other things being equal, one would 
sell his long at-the-money call when it has about 6 months of life left and simultane­
ously buy a 2-year LEAPS call. This keeps his time decay exposure to a. minimum. 
The out-of-the-money call is more radical. Figure 25-4 shows that the call that 
is 20% out-of-the-money begins to decay much more rapidly (percentagewise) at 
sometime just before it reaches one year until expiration. The same logic would dic­
tate, then, that if one is trading out-of-the-money options, he would sell his option 
held long when it has about one year to go and reestablish his position by buying a 2-
year LEAPS option at the same time. 
ADVANTAGES OF BUYING HCHEAP" 
It has been demonstrated that rising interest rates or rising volatility would make the 
price of a LEAPS call increase. Therefore, if one is attempting to participate in 
LEAPS speculative call buying strategies, he should be more aggressive when rates 
and volatilities are low. 
A few sample prices may help to demonstrate just how powerful the effects of 
rates and volatilities are, and how they can be a friend to the LEAPS call buyer. Suppose 
that one buys a 2-year LEAPS call at-the-money when the following situation exists: 
XYZ: 100 
January 2-year LEAPS call with strike of 100: 14 
Short-term interest rates: 3% 
Volatility: below average (historically) 
For the purposes of demonstration, suppose that the current volatility is low for XYZ 
(historically) and that 3% is a low level for rates as well. If the stock moves up, there 
is no problem, because the LEAPS call will increase in price. But what if the stock 
drops or stays unchanged? Is all hope of a profit lost? Actually, no. If interest rates 
increase or the volatility that the calls trade at increases, we know the LEAPS call will 
increase in value as well. Thus, even though the direction in which the stock is mov­
ing may be unfavorable, it might still be possible to salvage one's investment. Table 
25-3 shows where volatility would have to be or where short-term rates would have 

===== PDF PAGE 424 =====
386 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
TABLE 25-3. 
Factors necessary for January 2-year LEAPS to be = 14. 
Stock price After l month 
100 (unchanged) r = 3 .4% or 
V + 5% 
95 
90 
r = 6% or 
V + 20% 
r = 8.5% or 
V + 45% 
After 6 months 
r = 6% or 
V + 20% 
r = 9.4% or 
V + 45% 
r = 12.6% or 
V + 70% 
to go in order to keep the value of the LEAPS call at 14 even after the indicated 
amount of time had expired. 
To demonstrate the use of this table, suppose the stock price were 100 
(unchanged) after one month. If interest rates had 1isen to 3.4% from their original 
level of 3% during that time, the call would still be worth 14 even though one month 
had passed. Alternatively, if rates were the same, but volatility had increased by only 
5% from its original level, then the call would also still be worth 14. Note that this 
means that volatility would have to increase only slightly (by ½oth) from its original 
level, not by 5 percentage points. 
Even if the stock were to drop to 90 and six months had passed, the LEAPS call 
holder would still be even if rates had iisen to 12.6% (highly unlikely) or volatility had 
risen by 70%. It is often possible for volatilities to fluctuate to that extent in six 
months, but not likely for interest rates. 
In fact, as interest rates go, only the top line of the table probably represents 
realistic interest rates; an increase of 0.4% in one month, or 3% in 6 months, is pos­
sible. The other lines, where the stock drops in price, probably require too large a 
jump in rates for rates alone to be able to salvage the call price. However, any 
increase in rates will be helpful. Volatility is another matter. It is often feasible for 
volatilities to change by as much as 50% from their previous level in a month, and 
certainly in six months. Hence, as has been stated before, the volatility factor is the 
more dominant one. 
This table shows the effect of rising interest rates and volatilities on LEAPS 
calls. It would be beneficial to the LEAPS call owner and, of course, detrimental to 
the LEAPS call seller. This is clear evidence that one should be aware of the gener­
al level of rates and volatility before using LEAPS options in a strategy. 

===== PDF PAGE 425 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 
THE DELTA 
387 
The delta of an option is the amount by which the option price will change if the 
underlying stock changes in price by one point. In an earlier section of this chapter, 
comparing the differences between LEAPS and short-term calls, mention was made 
of delta. The subject is explored in more depth here because it is such an important 
concept, not only for option buyers, but for most strategic decisions as well. 
Figure 25-5 depicts the deltas of two different options: 2-year LEAPS and 3-
month equity options. Their terms are the same except for their expiration dates; strik­
ing price is 100, and volatility and interest rate assumptions are equal. The horizontal 
axis displays the stock price while the vertical axis shows the delta of the options. 
Several relevant observations can be made. First, notice that the delta of the at­
the-money LEAPS is very large, nearly 0.70. This means that the LEAPS call will 
move much more in line with the common stock than a comparable short-term equi­
ty option would. Very short-term at-the-money options have deltas of about½, while 
slightly longer-term ones have deltas ranging up to the 0.55 to 0.60 area. What this 
implies is that the longer the life of an at-the-nwney option, the greater its delta. 
In addition, the figure shows that the deltas of the 3-month call and the 2-year 
LEAPS call are about equal when the options a~e approximately 5% in-the-money. If 
the options are more in-the-money than that, then the LEAPS call has a lower delta. 
This means that at- and out-of-the-money LEAPS will move more in line with the 
common stock than comparable short-term options will. Restated, the LEAPS calls 
will move faster than the ordinary short-term equity calls unless both options are 
more than 5% in-the-money. Note that the movement referred to is in absolute terms 
in change of price, not in percentage terms. 
The delta of the 2-year LEAPS does not change as dramatically when the 
stock moves as does the delta of the 3-month option (see Figure 25-5). Notice that 
the LEAPS curve is relatively flat on the chart, rising only slightly above horizon­
tal. In contrast, the delta of the 3-month call is very low out-of-the-money and very 
large in-the-money. What this means to the call buyer is that the amount by which 
he can expect the LEAPS call to increase or decrease in price is somewhat stable. 
This can affect his choice of whether to buy the in-the-money call or the out-of­
the-money call. With normal short-term options, he can expect the in-the-money 
call to much more closely mirror the movement in the stock, so he might be tempt­
ed to buy that call if he expects a small movement in the stock. With LEAPS, how­
ever, there is much less discrepancy in the amount of option price movement that 
will occur. 

===== PDF PAGE 426 =====
388 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
FIGURE 25·5. 
Call delta comparison, 2-year LEAPS versus 3-month equity options. 
90 
80 
70 
8 60 ,... 
X 
.l!l 50 
Q) 
0 40 
30 t= 3 months 
20 
10 
O 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 
Stock Price 
Example: XYZ is trading at 82. There are 3-month calls with strikes of 80 and 90, and 
there are 2-year LEAPS calls at those strikes as well. The following table summarizes 
the available information: 
XYZ: 82 Date: January, 2002 
Option Price Delta 
April ('02) 80 call 4 s/a 
April ('02) 90 call i/a 
January ('04) 80 LEAPS call 14 3/4 
January ('04) 90 LEAPS call 7 1/2 
Suppose the trader expects a 3-point move by the underlying common stock, from 82 
to 85. If he were analyzing short-term calls, he would see his potential as a gain of 17/s 
in the April 80 call versus a gain of 3/s in the April 90 call. Each of these gains is pro­
jected by multiplying the call's delta times 3 (the expected stock move, in points). 
Thus, there is a large difference between the expected gains from these two options, 
particularly after commissions are considered. 
Now observe the LEAPS. The January 80 would increase by 2¼ while the 
January 90 would increase by 1 ½ if XYZ moved higher by 3 points. This is not near­
ly as large a discrepancy as the short-term options had. Observe that the January 90 
LEAPS sells for half the price of the January 80. These movements projected by the 

===== PDF PAGE 427 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 389 
delta indicate that the January 90 LEAPS will move by a larger percentage than the 
January 80 and therefore would be the better buy. 
PUT DELTAS 
Many of the previous observations regarding deltas of LEAPS calls can be applied to 
LEAPS puts as well. However, Figure 25-5 changes a little when the following for­
mula is applied. Recall that the relationship between put deltas and call deltas, except 
for deeply in-the-money puts, is: 
Put delta = Call delta - 1 
This has the effect of inverting the relationships that have just been described. 
In other words, while the short-term calls didn't move as fast as the LEAPS, the 
short-term puts move Jaster than the LEAPS puts in most cases. Figure 25-6 shows 
the deltas of these options. 
The vertical axis shows the puts' delta. Notice that out-of-the-money LEAPS 
puts and short-term equity puts don't behave very differently in terms of price 
change (bottom right-hand section of figure). 
In-the-money puts (when the stock is below the striking price) move faster if 
they are shorter-term. This fact is accentuated even more when the puts are more 
deeply in-the-money. The left-hand side of the figure depicts this fact. 
FIGURE 25-6. 
Put delta comparison, 2-year LEAPS versus 3-month equity options. 
90 
80 
70 t= 3 months 
0 60 
0 
1 50 
X 
Jg 40 
Q) 
0 
30 
20 
10 
O 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 
Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 428 =====
388 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
FIGURE 25-5. 
Call delta comparison, 2-year LEAPS versus 3-month equity options. 
90 
80 
70 
g 60 
; 50 
~ 
O 40 
30 t= 3 months 
20 
10 
O 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 
Stock Price 
Example: XYZ is trading at 82. There are 3-month calls with strikes of 80 and 90, and 
there are 2-year LEAPS calls at those strikes as well. The following table summarizes 
the available information: 
XYZ: 82 Date: January, 2002 
Option Price Delta 
April ('02) 80 call 4 s/a 
April ('02) 90 call 1 i/s 
January ('04) 80 LEAPS call 14 3/4 
January ('04) 90 LEAPS call 7 1/2 
Suppose the trader expects a 3-point move by the underlying common stock, from 82 
to 85. Ifhe were analyzing short-term calls, he would see his potential as a gain of F/s 
in the April 80 call versus a gain of 3/s in the April 90 call. Each of these gains is pro­
jected by multiplying the call's delta times 3 (the expected stock move, in points). 
Thus, there is a large difference behveen the expected gains from these two options, 
particularly after commissions are considered. 
Now observe the LEAPS. The January 80 would increase by 2¼ while the 
January 90 would increase by 1 ½ if XYZ moved higher by 3 points. This is not near­
ly as large a discrepancy as the short-term options had. Observe that the January 90 
LEAPS sells for half the price of the January 80. These movements projected by the 

===== PDF PAGE 429 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 389 
delta indicate that the January 90 LEAPS will move by a larger percentage than the 
January 80 and therefore would be the better buy. 
PUT DELTAS 
Many of the previous observations regarding deltas of LEAPS calls can be applied to 
LEAPS puts as well. However, Figure 25-5 changes a little when the following for­
mula is applied. Recall that the relationship between put deltas and call deltas, except 
for deeply in-the-money puts, is: 
Put delta = Call delta - 1 
This has the effect of inverting the relationships that have just been described. 
In other words, while the short-term calls didn't move as fast as the LEAPS, the 
short-term puts nwve fa,ster than the LEAPS puts in nwst cases. Figure 25-6 shows 
the deltas of these options. 
The vertical axis shows the puts' delta. Notice that out-of-the-money LEAPS 
puts and short-term equity puts don't behave very differently in terms of price 
change (bottom right-hand section offigure). 
In-the-money puts (when the stock is below the striking price) move faster if 
they are shorter-term. This fact is accentuated even more when the puts are more 
deeply in-the-money. The left-hand side of the figure depicts this fact. 
FIGURE 25-6. 
Put delta comparison, 2-year LEAPS versus 3-month equity options. 
90 
80 
70 t= 3 months 
0 60 
0 
1 50 
X 
Jg 40 
Q) 
0 
30 
20 
10 
O 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 
Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 430 =====
390 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
The LEAPS put delta curve is flat, just as the call delta curve was. Moreover, 
the delta is not very large anywhere across the figure. For example, at-the-money 2-
year LEAPS puts move only about 30 cents for a one-point move in the underlying 
stock. LEAPS put buyers who want to speculate on a stock's downward movement 
must realize that the leverage factor is not large; it takes approximately a 3-point 
move by the underlying common for an at-the-money LEAPS put to increase in 
value by one point. Long-term puts don't mirror stock movement nearly as well as 
shorter-term puts do. 
In summary, the option buyer who is considering buying LEAPS puts or calls as 
speculation should be aware of the different price action that LEAPS exhibit when 
compared to shorter-term options. Due to the large amount of time that LEAPS have 
remaining in their lives, the time decay of the LEAPS options is smaller. For this rea­
son, the LEAPS option buyer doesn't need to be as precise in his timing. In general, 
LEAPS calls move faster when the underlying stock moves, and LEAPS puts move 
more slowly. Other than that, the general reasons for speculative option buying apply 
to LEAPS as well: leverage and limited risk. 
SELLING LEAPS 
Strategies involving selling LEAPS options do not differ substantially from those 
involving shorter-term options. The discussions in this section concentrate on the two 
major differences that sellers of LEAPS will notice. First, the slow rate of time decay 
of LEAPS options means that option writers who are used to sitting back and watch­
ing their written options waste away will not experience the same effect with LEAPS. 
Second, follow-up action for writing strategies usually depends on being able to buy 
back the w1itten option when it has little or no time value premium remaining. Since 
LEAPS retain time value even when substantially in- or out-of-the-money, follow-up 
action involving LEAPS may involve the repurchase of substantial amounts of time 
value premium. 
COVERED WRITING 
LEAPS options can be sold against underlying stock just as short-term options can. 
No extra collateral or investment is required to do so. The resulting position is again 
one with limited profit potential, but enhanced profitability (as compared to stock 
ownership), if the underlying stock remains unchanged or falls. The maximum prof­
it potential of the covered write is reached whenever the underlying stock is at or 
above the striking price of the written option at expiration. 
The LEAPS covered writer takes in substantial premium, in terms of price, 
when he sells the long-term option. He should compare the return that he could 

===== PDF PAGE 431 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 391 
make from the LEAPS write with returns that can be made from repeatedly writing 
shorter-term calls. Of course, there is no guarantee that he will actually be able to 
repeat the short-term writes during the longer life of the LEAPS. 
As an aside, the strategist who is utilizing the incremental return concept of cov­
ered writing may find LEAPS call writing quite attractive. This is the strategy where­
in he has a higher target price at which he would be willing to sell his common stock, 
and he writes calls along the way to earn an incremental return (see Chapter 2 for 
details). Since this type of writer is only concerned with absolute levels of premiums 
being brought into the account and not with things like return if exercised, he should 
utilize LEAPS calls if available, since the premiums are the largest available. 
Moreover, if the incremental return writer is currently in a short-term call and is 
going to be called away, he might roll into a LEAPS call in order to retain his stock 
and take in more premium. 
The rest of this section discusses covered writing from the more normal view­
point of the investor who buys stock and sells a call against it in order to attain a par­
ticular return. 
Example: XYZ is selling at 50. The investor is considering a 500-share covered write 
and he is unsure whether to use the 6-month call or the 2-year LEAPS. The July 50 
call sells for 4 and has 6 months of life remaining; the January 50 LEAPS call sells for 
8½ and has 2 years of life. Further assume that XYZ pays a dividend of $0.25 per 
quarter. 
As was done in Chapter 2, the net required investment is calculated, then the 
return (if exercised) is computed, and finally the downside break-even point is deter­
mined. 
Stock cost (500 shares @ 50) 
Plus stock commission 
Less option premiums received 
Plus option commissions 
Net cash investment 
Net Investment Required 
July 50 call 
$25,000 
+ 300 
2,000 
+ 50 
$23,350 
January 50 LEAPS 
$25,000 
+ 300 
4,250 
+ 100 
$21,150 
Obviously, the LEAPS covered writer has a smaller cash investment, since he is sell­
ing a more expensive call in his covered write. Note that the option premium is being 
applied against the net investment in either case, as is the normal custom when doing 
covered writing. 
Now, using the net investment required, one can calculate the return (if exer­
cised). That return assumes the stock is above the striking price of the written option 

===== PDF PAGE 432 =====
392 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
at its expiration, and the stock is called away. The short-term writer would have col­
lected two dividends of the common stock, while the LEAPS writer would have col­
lected eight by expiration. 
Stock sale (500 @ 50) 
Less stock commission 
Plus dividends earned 
until expiration 
Less net investment 
Net profit if exercised 
Return if exercised 
(net profit/net investment) 
Return If Exercised 
+ 
July 50 call 
$25,000 
300 
250 
- 23,350 
$ 1,600 
6.9% 
January 50 LEAPS 
$25,000 
300 
+ 1,000 
- 21,150 
$ 4,550 
21.5% 
The LEAPS writer has a much higher net return if exercised, again because he 
wrote a more expensive option to begin with. However, in order to fairly compare the 
two writes, one must annualize the returns. That is, the July 50 covered write made 
6.9% in six months, so it could make twice that in one year, if it can be duplicated six 
months from now. In a similar manner, the LEAPS covered writer can make 21.5% 
in two years if the stock is called away. However, on an annualized basis, he would 
make only half that amount. 
Return If Exercised, Annualized 
July 50 call January 50 LEAPS 
13.8% 10.8% 
Thus, on an annualized basis, the short-term write seems better. The shorter-term 
call will generally have a higher rate of return, annualized, than the LEAPS call. The 
problems with annualizing are discussed in the following text. 
Finally, the downside break-even point can be computed for each write. 
Downside Break-Even Calculation 
Net investment 
Less dividends received 
Total stock cost to expiration 
Divided by shares held (500), 
equals break-even price: 
July 50 call 
$23,350 
250 
$23,100 
46.2 
January 50 LEAPS 
$21,150 
1 000 
$20,150 
40.3 

===== PDF PAGE 433 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 393 
The larger premium of the LEAPS call that was written produces this dramatically 
lower break-even price for the LEAPS covered write. 
Similar comparisons could be made for a covered write on margin if the investor 
is using a margin account. The steps above are the mechanical ones that a covered 
writer should go through in order to see how the short-term write compares to the 
longer-term LEAPS write. Analyzing them is often a less routine matter. It would 
seem that the short-term write is better if one uses the annualized rate of return. 
However, the annualized return is a somewhat subjective number that depends on 
several assumptions. 
The first assumption is that one will be able to generate an equivalent return six 
months from now when the July 50 call expires worthless or the stock is called away. 
If the stock were relatively unchanged, the covered writer would have to sell a 6-
month call for 4 points again six months from now. Or, if the stock were called away, 
he would have to invest in an equivalent situation elsewhere. Moreover, in order to 
reach the 2-year horizon offered by the LEAPS write, the 6-month return would 
have to be regenerated three more times (six months from now, one year from now, 
and a year and a half from now). The covered writer cannot assume that such returns 
can be repeated with any certainty every six months. 
The second assumption that was made when the annualized returns were cal­
culated was that one-half the return if exercised on the LEAPS call would be made 
when one year had passed. But, as has been demonstrated repeatedly in this chapter, 
the time decay of an option is not linear. Therefore, one year from now, if XYZ were 
still at 50, the January 50 LEAPS call would not be selling for half its current price 
(½ x 8½ = 4¼). It would be selling for something more like 5.00, if all other factors 
remained unchanged. However, given the variability of LEAPS call premiums when 
interest rates, volatility, or dividend payouts change, it is extremely difficult to esti­
mate the call price one year from now. Consequently, to say that the 21.5% 2-year 
return if exercised would be 10.8% after one year may well be a false statement. 
Thus, the covered writer must make his decision based on what he knows. He 
knows that with the short-term July 50 write, if the stock is called away in six months, 
he will make 6.9%, period. If he opts for the longer term, he will make 21.5% if he 
is called away in two years. Which is better? The question can only be answered by 
each covered writer individually. One's attitude toward long-term investing will be a 
major factor in making the decision. If he thinks XYZ has good prospects for the long 
term, and he feels conservative returns will be below 10% for the next couple of 
years, then he would probably choose the LEAPS write. However, if he feels that 
there is a temporary expansion of option premium in the short-term XYZ calls that 
should be exploited, and he would not really want to be a long-term holder of the 
stock, then he would choose the short-term covered write. 

===== PDF PAGE 434 =====
394 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Downside Protection. The actual downside break-even point might enter into 
one's thinking as well. A downside break-even point of 40.3 is available by using the 
LEAPS write, and that is a known quantity. No matter how far XYZ might fall, as long 
as it can recover to slightly over 40 by expiration two years from now, the investment 
will at least break even. A problem arises if XYZ falls to 40 quickly. If that happened, 
the LEAPS call would still have a significant amount of time value premium remain­
ing on it. Thus, if the investor attempted to sell his stock at that time and buy back 
his call, he would have a loss, not a break-even situation. 
The short-term write offers downside protection only to a stock price of 46.2. 
Of course, repeated writes of 6-month calls over the next 2 years would lower the 
break-even point below that level. The problem is that if XYZ declines and one is 
forced to keep selling 6-month calls every 6 months, he may be forced to use a lower 
striking price, thereby locking in a smaller profit ( or possibly even a loss) if premium 
levels shrink. The concepts of rolling down are described in detail in Chapter 2. 
A further word about rolling down may be in order here. Recall that rolling 
down means buying back the call that is currently written and selling another one 
with a lower striking price. Such action always reduces the profitability of the over­
all position, although it may be necessary to prevent further downside losses if the 
common stock keeps declining. Now that LEAPS are available, the short-term writer 
faced with rolling down may look to the LEAPS as a means of bringing in a healthy 
premium even though he is rolling down. It is true that a large premium could be 
brought into the account. But remember that by doing so, one is committing himself 
to sell the stock at a lower price than he had originally intended. This is why the 
rolling down reduces the original profit potential. If he rolls down into a LEAPS call, 
he is reducing his maximum profit potential for a longer period of time. 
Consequently, one should not always roll dm,vn into an option with a longer maturi­
ty. Instead, he should carefully analyze whether he wants to be committed for an 
even longer time to a position in which the underlying common stock is declining. 
To summarize, the large absolute premiums available in LEAPS calls may make 
a covered write of those calls seem unusually attractive. However, one should calcu­
late the returns available and decide whether a short-term write might not serve his 
purpose as well. Even though the large LEAPS premium might reduce the initial 
investment to a mere pittance, be aware that this creates a great amount of leverage, 
and leverage can be a dangerous thing. 
The large amount of downside protection offered by the LEAPS call is real, but 
if the stock falls quickly, there would definitely be a loss at the calculated downside 
break-even point. Finally, one cannot always roll down into a LEAPS call if trouble 
develops, because he will be committing himself for an even longer period of time to 
sell his stock at a lower price than he had originally intended. 

===== PDF PAGE 435 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 39S 
✓,,FREE" COVERED CALL WRITES 
In Chapter 2, a strategy of writing expensive LEAPS options was briefly described. 
In this section, a more detailed analysis is offered. A certain type of covered call 
write, one in which the call is quite expensive, sometimes attracts traders looking for 
a "free ride." To a certain extent, this strategy is something of a free ride. As you 
might imagine, though, there can be major problems. 
The investment required for a covered call write on margin is 50% of the stock 
price, less the proceeds received from selling the call. In theory, it is possible for an 
option to sell for more than 50% of the stock cost. This is a margin account, a cov­
ered write could be established for "free." Let's discuss this in terms of two types of 
calls: the in-the-money call write and the out-of-the-money call write. 
Out-of-the-Money Covered Call Write. This is the simplest way to approach 
the strategy. One may be able to find LEAPS options that are just slightly out-of-the­
money, which sell for 50% of the stock price. Understandably, such a stock would be 
quite volatile. 
Example: GOGO stock is selling for $38 per share. GOGO has listed options, and a 
2-year LEAPS call with a striking price of 40 is selling for $19. The requirement for 
this covered write would be zero, although some commission costs would be 
involved. The debit balance would be 19 points per share, the amount the broker 
loans you on margin. 
Certain brokerage firms might require some sort of minimum margin deposit, but 
technically there is no further requirement for this position. Of course, the leverage 
is infinite. Suppose one decided to buy 10,000 shares of GOGO and sell 100 calls, 
covered. His risk is $190,000 if the stock falls to zero! That also happens to be the 
debit balance in his account. Thus, for a minimal investment, one could lose a for­
tune. In addition, if the stock begins to fall, one's broker is going to want maintenance 
margin. He probably wouldn't let the stock slip more than a couple of points before 
asking for margin. If one owns 10,000 shares and the broker wants two points main­
tenance margin, that means the margin call would be $20,000. 
The profits wouldn't be as big as they might at first seem. The maximum gross 
profit potential is $210,000 if the 10,000 shares are called away at 40. The covered 
write makes 21 points on each share - the $40 sale price less the original cost of $19. 
However, one will have had to pay interest on the debit balance of $190,000 for two 
years. At 10%, say, that's a total of $38,000. There would also be commissions on the 
purchase and the sale. 

===== PDF PAGE 436 =====
396 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
In summary, this is a position with tremendous, even dangerous, leverage. 
In-the-Money Covered Call Write. The situation is slightly different if the 
option is in-the-money to begin with. The above margin requirements actually don't 
quite accurately state the case for a margined covered call write. When a covered call 
is written against the stock, there is a catch: Only 50% of the stock price or the strike 
price, whichever is less, is available for "release." Thus, one will actually be required 
to put up more than 50% of the stock price to begin with. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 50, and there is a 2-year LEAPS call with a strike price 
of 30, selling for 25 points. One might think that the requirement for a covered call 
write would be zero, since the call sells for 50% of the stock price. But that's not the 
case with in-the-money covered calls. 
Margin requirement: 
Buy stock: 50 points 
Less option proceeds -25 
Less margin release* -15* 
Net requirement: 10 points 
* 50% of the strike price or 50% of stock price, whichever is less. 
This position still has a lot ofleverage: One invests 10 points in hopes of making 5, if 
the stock is called away at 30. One also would have to pay interest on the 15-point 
debit balance, of course, for the two-year duration of the position. Furthermore, 
should the stock fall below the strike price, the broker would begin to require main­
tenance margin. 
Note that the above "formula" for the net requirement works equally well for 
the out-of-the-money covered call write, since 50% of the stock price is always less 
than 50% of the strike price in that case. 
To summarize this "free ride" strategy: If one should decide to use this strate­
gy, he must be extremely aware of the dangers of high leverage. One must not risk 
more money than he can afford to lose, regardless of how small the initial investment 
might be. Also, he must plan for some method of being able to make the margin pay­
ments along the way. Finally, the in-the-money alternative is probably better, because 
there is less probability that maintenance margin will be asked for. 
SELLING UNCOVERED LEAPS 
Uncovered option selling can be a viable strategy, especially if premiums are over­
priced. LEAPS options may be sold uncovered with the same margin requirements 
as short-term options. Of course, the particular characteristics of the long-term 
option may either help or hinder the uncovered writer, depending on his objective. 

===== PDF PAGE 437 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 397 
Uncovered Put Selling. Naked put selling is addressed first because, as a strat­
egy, it is equivalent to covered writing, and covered writing was just discussed. Two 
strategies are equivalent if they have the same profit picture at expiration. Naked put 
selling and covered call writing are equivalent because they have the profit picture 
depicted in Graph I, Appendix D. Both have limited upside profit potential and large 
loss exposure to the downside. In general, when two strategies are equivalent, one of 
the two has certain advantages over the other. 
In this case, naked put selling is normally the more advantageous of the two 
because of the way margin requirements are set. One need not actually invest cash 
in the sale of a naked put; the margin requirement that is asked for may be satisfied 
with collateral. This means the naked put writer may use stocks, bonds, T-bills, or 
money market funds as collateral. Moreover, the actual amount of collateral that is 
required is less than the cash or margin investment required to buy stock and sell a 
call. This means that one could operate his portfolio normally - buying stock, then 
selling it and putting the proceeds in a Treasury bill or perhaps buying another stock 
- without disturbing his naked put position, as long as he maintained the 
collateral requirement. 
Consequently, the strategist who is buying stock and selling calls should probably 
be selling naked puts instead. This does not apply to covered writers who are writing 
against existing stock or who are using the incremental return concept of covered writ­
ing, because stock ownership is part of their strategy. However, the strategist who is 
looking to take in premium to profit if the underlying stock remains relatively 
unchanged or rises, while having a modicum of downside protection ( which is the 
definition of both naked put writing and covered writing), should be selling naked 
puts. As an example of this, consider the LEAPS covered write discussed previously. 
Example: XYZ is selling at 50. The investor is debating between a 500-share covered 
write using 2-year LEAPS calls or selling five 2-year LEAPS puts. The January 50 
LEAPS call sells for 8½ and has two years of life, while the January 50 LEAPS put 
sells for 3½. Further assume that XYZ pays a dividend of $0.25 per quarter. 
The net investment required for the covered write is calculated as it was before. 
Net Investment Required - Covered Write 
Stock cost (500 shares @ 50) 
Plus stock commission 
Less option premiums received 
Plus option commissions 
Net cash investment 
+ 
$25,000 
300 
- 4,250 
+ 100 
$21,150 

===== PDF PAGE 438 =====
398 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
The collateral requirement for the naked put write is the same as that for any 
naked equity option: 20% of the stock price, plus the option price, less any out-of­
the-money amount, with an absolute minimum requirement of 15% of the stock 
price. 
Collateral Requirement - Naked Put 
20% of stock price (.20 x 500 x $50) 
Plus option premium 
Less out-of-the-money amount 
Total collateral requirement 
$5,000 
1,750 
0 
$6,750 
Note that the actual premium received by the naked put seller is $1,750 less com­
missions of $100, for example, or $1,650. This net premium could be used to reduce 
the total collateral requirement. 
Now one can compare the profitability of the two investments: 
Return If Stock Over 50 at Expiration 
Stock sale {500 @ 50) 
Less stock commission 
Plus dividends earned until expiration 
Less net investment 
Net profit if exercised 
Net put premium received 
Dividends received 
Net profit 
Covered Write 
$25,000 
300 
+ 1,000 
- 21,150 
$ 4,55_0 
Naked Put Sole 
$1,650 
0 
$1,650 
Now the returns can be compared, if XYZ is over 50 at expiration of the LEAPS: 
Return if XYZ over 50 
(net profit/net investment) 
Naked put sale: 24.4% 
Covered write: 21 .5% 
The naked put write has a better rate of return, even before the following fact 
is considered. The strategist who is using the naked put write does not have to spend 
the $6,750 collateral requirement in the form of cash. That money can be kept in a 

===== PDF PAGE 439 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 399 
Treasury bill and earn interest over the two years that the put write is in place. Even 
if the T-bill were earning only 4% per year, that would increase the overall two-year 
return for the naked put sale by 8%, to 32.4%. This should make it obvious that naked 
put selling is rrwre strategically advantageous than covered call writing. 
Even so, one might rightfully wonder if LEAPS put selling is better than selling 
shorter-term equity puts. As was the case with covered call writing, the answer 
depends on what the investor is trying to accomplish. Short-term puts will not bring 
as much premium into the account, so when they expire, one will be forced to find 
another suitable put sale to replace it. On the other hand, the LEAPS put sale brings 
in a larger premium and one does not have to find a replacement until the longer­
term LEAPS put expires. The negative aspect to selling the LEAPS puts is that time 
decay won't help much right away and, even if the stock moves higher (which is 
ostensibly good for the position), the put won't decline in price by a large amount, 
since the delta of the put is relatively small. 
One other factor might enter in the decision regarding whether to use short­
term puts or LEAPS puts. Some put writers are actually attempting to buy stock 
below the market price. That is, they would not mind being assigned on the put they 
sell, meaning that they would buy stock at a net cost of the striking price less the pre­
mium they received from the sale of the put. If they don't get assigned, they get to 
keep a profit equal to the premium they received when they first sold the put. 
Generally, a person would only sell puts in this manner on a stock that he had faith 
in, so that if he was assigned on the put, he would view that as a buying opportunity 
in the underlying stock. This strategy does not lend itself well to LEAPS. Since the 
LEAPS puts will carry a significant amount of time premium, there is little (if any) 
chance that the put writer will actually be assigned until the life of the put shortens 
substantially. This means that it is unlikely that the put writer will become a stock 
owner via assignment at any time in the near future. Consequently, if one is attempt­
ing to wTite puts in order to eventually buy the common stock when he is assigned, 
he would be better served to write shorter-term puts. 
UNCOVERED CALL SELLING 
There are very few differences between using LEAPS for naked call selling and using 
shorter-term calls, except for the ones that have been discussed already with regard 
to selling uncovered LEAPS: Time value decay occurs more slowly and, if the stock 
rallies and the naked calls have to be covered, the call writer will normally be paying 
more time premium than he is used to when he covers the call. Of course, the rea­
son that one is engaged in naked call writing might shed some more light on the use 
of LEAPS for that purpose. 

===== PDF PAGE 440 =====
400 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
The overriding reason that most strategists sell naked calls is to collect the time 
premium before the stock can rise above the striking price. These strategists gener­
ally have an opinion about the stock's direction, believing that it is perhaps trapped 
in a trading range or even headed lower over the short term. This strategy does not 
lend itself well to using LEAPS, since it would be difficult to project that the stock 
would remain below the strike for so long a period of time. 
Short LEAPS Instead of Short Stock. Another reason that naked calls are 
sold is as a strategy akin to shorting the common stock. In this case, in-the-money 
calls are sold. The advantages are threefold: 
l. The amount of collateral required to sell the call is less than that required to sell 
stock short. 
2. One does not have to borrow an option in order to sell it short, although one must 
borrow common stock in order to sell it short. 
3. An uptick is not required to sell the option, but one is required in order to sell 
stock short. 
For these reasons, one might opt to sell an in-the-money call instead of shorting 
stock. 
The profit potentials of the two strategies are different. The short seller of stock 
has a very large profit potential if the stock declines substantially, while the seller of 
an in-the-money call can collect only the call premium no matter how far the stock 
drops. Moreover, the call's price decline will slow as the stock nears the strike. 
Another way to express this is to say that the delta of the call shrinks from a number 
close to l (which means the call mirrors stock movements closely) to something more 
like 0.50 at the strike (which means that the call is only declining half as quickly as 
the stock). 
Another problem that may occur for the call seller is early assignment, a topic 
that is addressed shortly. One should not attempt this strategy if the underlying stock 
is not borrowable for ordinary short sales. If the underlying stock is not available for 
borrowing, it generally means that extraneous forces are at work; perhaps there is a 
tender offer or exchange offer going on, or some form of convertible arbitrage is tak­
ing place. In any case, if the underlying stock is not borrowable, one should not be 
deluded into thinking that he can sell an in-the-money call instead and have a worry­
free position. In these cases, the call will normally have little or no time premium and 
may be subject to early assignment. If such assignment does occur, the strategist will 
become short the stock and, since it is not borrowable, will have to cover the stock. 
At the least, he will cost himself some commissions by this unprofitable strategy; and 
at worst, he will have to pay a higher price to buy back the stock as well. 

===== PDF PAGE 441 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 401 
LEAPS calls may help to alleviate this problem. Since they are such long-term 
calls, they are likely to have some time value premium in them. In-the-money calls that 
have time value premium are not normally assigned. As an alternative to shorting a 
stock that is not borrowable, one might try to sell an in-the-money LEAPS call, but 
only if it has time value premium remaining. Just because the call has a long time 
remaining until expiration does not mean that it must have time value premium, as will 
be seen in the following discussion. Finally, if one does sell the LEAPS call, he must 
realize that if the stock drops, the LEAPS call will not follow it completely. As the stock 
nears the strike, the amount of time value premium will build up to an even greater 
level in the LEAPS. Still, the naked call seller would make some profit in that case, and 
it presents a better alternative than not being able to sell the stock short at all. 
Early Assignment. An American-style option is one that can be exercised at any 
time during its life. All listed equity options, LEAPS included, are of this variety. 
Thus, any in-the-money option that has been sold may become subject to early 
assignment. The clue to whether early assignment is imminent is whether there is 
time value premium in the option. If the option has no time value premium - in other 
words, it is trading at parity or at a discount then assignment may be close at hand. 
The option writer who does not want to be assigned would want to cover the option 
when it no longer carries time premium. 
LEAPS may be subject to early assignment as well. It is possible, albeit far less 
likely, that a long-term option would lose all of its time value premium and therefore 
be subject to early assignment. This would certainly happen if the underlying stock 
were being taken over and a tender off er were coming to fruition. However, it may 
also occur because of an impending dividend payment, or more specifically, because 
the stock is about to go ex-dividend. Recall that the call owner, LEAPS calls includ­
ed, is not entitled to any dividends paid by the underlying stock. So if the call owner 
wants the dividend, he exercises his call on the day before the stock goes ex-dividend. 
This makes him an owner of the common stock just in the nick of time to get the div­
idend. 
What economic factors motivate him to exercise the call? If there is any time 
value premium at all in the call, the call holder would be better off selling the call in 
the open market and then purchasing the stock in the open market as well. In this 
manner, he would still get the dividend, but he would get a better price for his call 
when he sold it. If, however, there is no time value premium in the call, he does not 
have to bother with two transactions in the open market; he merely exercises his call 
in order to buy stock. 
All well and good, but what makes the call sell at parity before expiration? It has 
to do with the arbitrage that is available for any call option. In this case, the arbitrage 

===== PDF PAGE 442 =====
402 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
is not the simple discount arbitrage that was discussed in Chapter l when this topic 
was covered. Rather, it is a more complicated form that is discussed in greater detail 
in Chapter 28. Suffice it to say that if the dividend is larger than the interest that can 
be earned from a credit balance equal to the striking price, then the time value pre­
mium will disappear from the call. 
Example: XYZ is a $30 stock and about to go ex-dividend 50 cents. The prevailing 
short-term interest rate is 5% and there are LEAPS with a striking price of 20. 
A 50-cent quarterly dividend on a striking price of 20 is an annual dividend rate 
(on the strike) of 10%. Since short-term rates are much lower than that, arbitrageurs 
economically cannot pay out 10% for dividends and earn 5% for their credit balances. 
In this situation, the LEAPS call would lose its time value premium and would 
be a candidate for early exercise when the stock goes ex-dividend. 
In actual practice, the situation is more complicated than this, because the price 
of the puts comes into play; but this example shows the general reasoning that the 
arbitrageur must go through. 
Certain arbitrageurs construct positions that allow them to earn interest on a 
credit balance equal to the striking price of the call. This position involves being short 
the underlying stock and being long the call. Thus, when the stock goes ex-dividend, 
the arbitrageur will owe the dividend. If, however, the amount of the dividend is 
more than he vvill earn in interest from his credit balance, he will merely exercise his 
call to cover his short stock. This action will prevent him from having to pay out the 
dividend. 
The arbitrageur's exercise of the call means that someone is going to be 
assigned. If you are a writer of the call, it could be you. It is not important to under­
stand the arbitrage completely; its effect will be reflected in the marketplace in the 
form of a call trading at parity or a discount. Thus, even a LEAPS call with a sub­
stantial anwunt of time rernaining may be assigned if it is trading at parity. 
STRADDLE SELLING 
Straddle selling is equivalent to ratio writing and is a strategy whereby one attempts 
to sell ( overpriced) options in order to produce a range of stock prices within which 
the option seller can profit. The strategy often involves follow-up action as the stock 
moves around, and the strategist feels that he must adjust his position in order to pre­
vent large losses. LEAPS puts and calls might be used for this strategy. However, 
their long-term nature is often not conducive to the aims of straddle selling. 
First, consider the effect of time decay. One might normally sell a three-month 
straddle. If the stock "behaves" and is relatively unchanged after two months have 

===== PDF PAGE 443 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 403 
passed, the straddle seller could reasonably expect to have a profit of about 40% of 
the original straddle price. However, if one had sold a 2-year LEAPS straddle, and 
the stock were relatively unchanged after two months, he would only have a profit of 
about 7% of the original sale price. This should not be surprising in light of what has 
been demonstrated about the decaying of long-term options. It should make the 
straddle seller somewhat leery of using LEAPS, however, unless he truly thinks the 
options are overpriced. 
Second, consider follow-up action. Recall that in Chapter 20, it was shown that 
the bane of the straddle seller was the whipsaw. A whipsaw occurs when one makes 
a follow-up protective action on one side (for instance, he does something bullish 
because the underlying stock is rising and the short calls are losing money), only to 
have the stock reverse and come crashing back down. Obviously, the more time left 
until expiration, the more likely it is that a whipsaw will occur after any follow-up 
action, and the more expensive it will be, since there will be a lot of time value pre­
mium left in the options that are being repurchased. This makes LEAPS straddle 
selling less than attractive. 
LEAPS straddles may look expensive because of their large absolute price, and 
therefore may appear to be attractive straddle sale candidates. However, the price is 
often justified, and the seller of LEAPS straddles will be fighting sudden stock move­
ments without getting much benefit from the passage of time. The best time to sell 
LEAPS straddles is when short-term rates are high and volatilities are high as well 
(i.e., the options are overpriced). At least, in those cases, the seller will derive some 
real benefit if rates or volatilities should drop. 
SPREADS USING LEAPS 
Any of the spread strategies previously discussed can be implemented with LEAPS 
as well, if one desires. The margin requirements are the same for LEAPS spreads as 
they are for ordinary equity option spreads. One general category of spread lends 
itself well to using LEAPS: that of buying a longer-term option and selling a short­
term one. Calendar spreads, as well as diagonal spreads, fall into that category. 
The combinations are myriad, but the reasoning is the same. One wants to own 
the option that is not so subject to time decay, while simultaneously selling the 
option that is quite subject to time decay. Of course, since LEAPS are long-term and 
therefore expensive, one is generally taking on a large debit in such a spread and 
may have substantial risk if the stock performs adversely. Other risks may be pres­
ent as well. As a means of demonstrating these facts, let us consider a simple bull 
spread using calls. 

===== PDF PAGE 444 =====
404 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
Example: The following prices exist in the month of January: 
XYZ: 105 
April 100 call: 10 1/2 
April 110 call: 5 1/2 
January (2-year) 100 call: 26 
January (2-year) 110 call: 21 1/2 
An investor is considering a bull spread in XYZ and is unsure about whether to use 
the short-term calls, the LEAPS calls, or a mixture. These are his choices: 
Short-term bull spread: 
Diagonal bull spread: 
LEAPS bull spread: 
Buy April 100@ 101/2 
Sell April 110@ 51/2 
Net Debit: $500 
Buy January LEAPS 100 @ 26 
Sell April 110@ 51/2 
Net Debit: $2,050 
Buy January LEAPS 1 00 @ 26 
Sell January LEAPS 110@ 21 1/2 
Net Debit: $450 
Notice that the debit paid for the LEAPS spread is slightly less than that of the short­
term bull spread. This means that they have approximately the same profit potential 
at their respective expiration dates. However, the strategist is more concerned with 
how these compare directly with each other. The obvious point in time to make this 
comparison is when the short-term options expire. 
Figure 25-7 shows the profitability of these three positions at April expiration. 
It was assumed that all of the following were the same in April as they had been in 
January: volatility, short-term rates, and dividend payout. 
Note that the short-term bull spread has the familiar profit graph from Chapter 
7, making its maximum profit over 110 and taking its maximum loss below 100. (See 
Table 25-4.) 
The LEAPS spread doesn't generate much of either a profit or a loss in only 
three months' time. Even if XYZ rises to 120, the LEAPS bull spread will have only 
a $150 profit. Conversely, if XYZ falls to 80, the spread loses only about $200. This 
price action is very typical for long-term bull spreads when both options have a sig­
nificant amount of time premium remaining in them. 

===== PDF PAGE 445 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 
FIGURE 25-7. 
Bull spread comparison at April expiration. 
Stock Price 
405 
The diagonal spread is different, however. Typically, the maximum profit poten­
tial of a bull spread is the difference in the strikes less the initial debit paid. For this 
diagonal spread, that would be $1,000 minus $2,050, a loss! Obviously, this simple 
formula is not applicable to diagonal spreads, because the purchased option still has 
time value premium when the written option expires. The profit graph shows that 
indeed the diagonal spread is the most bullish of the three. It makes its best profit at 
the strike of the written option - a standard procedure for any spread - and that prof­
it is greater than either of the other two spreads at April expiration ( under the sig-
TABLE 25-4. 
Bull spread comparison at April expiration. 
Stock Price Short-Term Diagonal LEAPS 
80 -500 -1, 100 -200 
90 -500 - 600 -150 
100 -500 50 - 25 
110 500 750 50 
120 500 550 150 
140 500 150 250 
160 500 50 350 
180 500 - 350 450 

===== PDF PAGE 446 =====
406 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
nificant assumption that volatility and interest rates are unchanged). If XYZ trades 
higher than llO, the diagonal spread will lose some of its profit; in fact, if XYZ were 
to trade at a very high price, the diagonal spread would actually have a loss (see Table 
25-4). Whenever the purchased LEAPS call loses its time value premium, the diag­
onal spread will not perform as well. 
If the common stock drops in price, the diagonal spread has the greatest risk in 
dollar terms but not in percentage terms, because it has the largest initial debit. If 
XYZ falls to 80 in three months, the spread will lose about $1,100, just over half the 
initial $2,050 debit. Obviously, the short-term spread would have lost 100% of its ini­
tial debit, which is only $500, at that same point in time. 
The diagonal spread presents an opportunity to earn more money if the under­
lying common is near the strike of the written option when the written option expires. 
However, if the common moves a great deal in either direction, the diagonal spread 
is the worst of the three. This means that the diagonal spread strategy is a neutral 
strategy: One wants the underlying common to remain near the written strike until 
the near-term option expires. This is a true statement even if the diagonal spread is 
under the guise of a bullish spread, as in the previous example. 
Many traders are fond of buying LEAPS and selling an out-of-the-money near­
term call as a hedge. Be careful about doing this. If the underlying common rises too 
fast and/or interest rates fall and/or volatility decreases, this could be a poor strategy. 
There is really nothing quite as psychologically damaging as being right about the 
stock, but being in the wrong option strategy and therefore losing money. Consider 
the above examples. Ostensibly, the spreader was bullish on XYZ; that's why he chose 
bull spreads. If XYZ became a wildly bullish stock and rose from 100 to 180 in three 
months, the diagonal spreader would have lost money. He couldn't have been happy 
- no one would be. This is something to keep in mind when diagonalizing a LEAPS 
spread. 
The deltas of the options involved in the spread will give one a good clue as to 
how it is going to perform. Recall that a short-term, in-the-money option acquires a 
rather high delta, especially as expiration draws nigh. However, an in-the-money 
LEAPS call will not have an extremely high delta, because of the vast amount of time 
remaining. Thus, one is short an option with a high delta and long an option with a 
smaller delta. These deltas indicate that one is going to lose money if the underlying 
stock rises in price. Consider the following situation: 
XYZ Stock, 120: 
Call 
Long 1 January LEAPS 100 call: 
Short 1 April 110 call: 
Position Delta 
0.70 
-0.90 

===== PDF PAGE 447 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 401 
At this point, if XYZ rises in price by 1 point, the spread can be expected to lose 20 
cents, since the delta of the short option is 0.20 greater than the delta of the long 
option. 
This phenomenon has ramifications for the diagonal spreader of LEAPS. If the 
two strike prices of the spread are too close together, it may actually be possible to 
construct a bull spread that loses money on the upside. That would be very difficult 
for most traders to accept. In the above example, as depicted in Table 25-4, that's 
what happens. One way around this is to widen the strike prices out so that there is 
at least some profit potential, even if the stock rises dramatically. That may be diffi­
cult to do and still be able to sell the short-term option for any meaningful amount 
of premium. 
Note that a diagonal spread could even be considered as a substitute for a cov­
ered write in some special cases. It was shown that a LEAPS call can sometimes be 
used as a substitute for the common stock, with the investor placing the difference 
between the cost of the LEAPS call and the cost of the stock in the bank (or in T­
bills). Suppose that an investor is a covered writer, buying stock and selling relative­
ly short-term calls against it. If that investor were to make a LEAPS call substitution 
for his stock, he would then have a diagonal bull spread. Such a diagonal spread 
would probably have less risk than the one described above, since the investor pre­
sumably chose the LEAPS substitution because it was "cheap." Still, the potential 
pitfalls of the diagonal bull spread would apply to this situation as well. Thus, if one 
is a covered writer, this does not necessarily mean that he can substitute LEAPS calls 
for the long stock without taking care. The resulting position may not resemble a cov­
ered write as much as he thought it would. 
The "bottom line" is that if one pays a debit greater than the difference in the 
strike prices, he may eventually lose money if the stock rises far enough to virtually 
eliminate the time value premium of both options. This comes into play also if one 
rolls his options down if the underlying stock declines. Eventually, by doing so, he 
may invert the strikes - i.e., the striking price of the written option is lower than the 
striking price of the option that is owned. In that case, he will have locked in a loss if 
the overall credit he has received is less than the difference in the strikes - a quite 
likely event. So, for those who think this strategy is akin to a guaranteed profit, think 
again. It most certainly is not. 
Backspreads. LEAPS may be applied to other popular forms of diagonal spreads, 
such as the one in which in-the-money, near-term options are sold, and a greater quan­
tity of longer-term (LEAPS) at- or out-of-the money calls are bought. (This was 
referred to as a diagonal backspread in Chapter 14.) This is an excellent strategy, and 

===== PDF PAGE 448 =====
408 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
a LEAPS may be used as the long option in the spread. Recall that the object of the 
spread is for the stock to be volatile, particularly to the upside if calls are used. If that 
doesn't happen, and the stock declines instead, at least the premium captured from 
the in-the-money sale will be a gain to offset against the loss suffered on the longer­
term calls that were purchased. The strategy can be established with puts as well, in 
which case the spreader would want the underlying stock to fall dramatically while the 
spread was in place. 
Without going into as much detail as in the examples above, the diagonal back­
spreader should realize that he is going to have a significant debit in the spread and 
could lose a significant portion of it should the underlying stock fall a great deal in 
price. To the upside, his LEAPS calls will retain some time value premium and will 
move quite closely with the underlying common stock. Thus, he does not have to buy 
as many LEAPS as he might think in order to have a neutral spread. 
Example: XYZ is at 105 and a spreader wants to establish a backspread. Recall that 
the quantity of options to use in a neutral strategy is determined by dividing the 
deltas of the two options. Assume the following prices and deltas exist: 
Option 
April 100 call 
July 110 call 
January (2-year) LEAPS 100 call 
XYZ: 105 in January 
Price 
8 
5 
15 
Delta 
0.75 
0.50 
0.60 
Two backspreads are available with these options. In the first, one would sell the 
April 100 calls and buy the July llO calls. He would be selling 3-month calls and buy­
ing 6-month calls. The neutral ratio is 0.75/0.50 or 3 to 2; that is, 3 calls are to be 
bought for every 2 sold. Thus, a neutral spread would be: 
Buy 6 July 110 calls 
Sell 4 April l 00 calls 
As a second alternative, he might use the LEAPS as the long side of the spread; he 
would still sell the April 100 calls as the short side of the spread. In this case, his neu­
tral ratio would be 0.75/0.60, or 5 to 4. The resulting neutral spread would be: 
Buy 5 January LEAPS 110 calls 
Sell 4 April 100 calls 

===== PDF PAGE 449 =====
Chapter 25: LEAPS 409 
Thus, a neutral backspread involving LEAPS requires buyingfewer calls than a neu­
tral backspread involving a 6-rnonth option on the long side. This is because the delta 
of the LEAPS call is larger. The significant point here is that, because of the time 
value retention of the LEAPS call, even when the stock moves higher, it is not nec­
essary to buy as many. If one does not use the deltas, but merely figures that 3 to 2 
is a good ratio for any diagonal backspread, then he will be overly bullish if he uses 
LEAPS. That could cost him if the underlying stock declines. 
Calendar Spreads. LEAPS may also be used in calendar spreads - spreads in 
which the striking price of the longer-term option purchased and the shorter-term 
option sold are the same. The calendar spread is a neutral strategy, wherein the 
spreader wants the underlying stock to be as close as possible to the striking price 
when the near-term option expires. A calendar spread has risk if the stock moves too 
far away from the striking price (see Chapters 9 and 22). Purchasing a LEAPS call 
increases that risk in terms of dollars, not percentage, because of the larger debit that 
one must spend for the spread. 
Simplistically, calendar spreads are established with equal quantities of options 
bought and sold. This is often not a neutral strategy in the true sense. As was shown 
in Chapter 9 on call calendar spreads, one may want to use the deltas of the two 
options to establish a truly neutral calendar spread, particularly if the stock is not ini­
tially right at the striking price. Out-of-the-money, one would sell more calls than he 
is buying. Conversely, in-the-money, one would buy more calls than he is selling. 
Both strategies statistically have merit and are attractive. When using LEAPS deltas 
to construct the neutral spread, one need generally buy fewer calls than he might 
think, because of the higher delta of a LEAPS call. This is the same phenomenon 
described in the previous example of a diagonal backspread. 
SUMMARY 
LEAPS are nothing more than long-term options. They are usable in a wide variety 
of strategies in the same way that any option would be. Their margin and investment 
requirements are similar to those of the more familiar equity options. Both LEAPS 
puts and calls are traded, and there is a secondary market for them as well. 
There are certain differences between the prices of LEAPS and those of short­
er-term options, but the greatest is the relatively large effect that interest rates and 
dividends have on the price of LEAPS, because LEAPS are long-term options. 
Increases in interest rates will cause LEAPS to increase in price, while increases in 
dividend payout will cause LEAPS calls to decrease in price and LEAPS puts to 

===== PDF PAGE 450 =====
410 Part Ill: Put Option Strategies 
increase in price. As usual, volatility has a major effect on the price of an option, and 
LEAPS are no exception. Even small changes in the volatility of the underlying com­
mon stock can cause large price differences in a two-year option. The rate of decay 
due to time is much smaller for LEAPS, since they are long-term options. Finally, the 
deltas of LEAPS calls are larger than those of short-term calls; conversely, the deltas 
of LEAPS puts are smaller. 
Several common strategies lend themselves well to the usage of LEAPS. A 
LEAPS may be used as a stock substitute if the cash not invested in the stock is 
instead deposited in a CD or T-bill. LEAPS puts can be bought as protection for 
common stock. Speculative option buyers will appreciate the low rate of time decay 
of LEAPS. LEAPS calls can be written against common stock, thereby creating a 
covered write, although the sale of naked LEAPS puts is probably a better strategy 
in most cases. Spread strategies with LEAPS may be viable as well, but the spreader 
should carefully consider the ramifications of buying a long-term option and selling 
a shorter-term one against it. If the underlying stock moves a great distance quickly, 
the spread strategy may not perform as expected. 
Overall, LEAPS are not very different from the shorter-term options to which 
traders and investors have become accustomed. Once these investors become famil­
iar with the way these long-term options are affected by the various factors that 
determine the price of an option, they will consider the use of LEAPS as an integral 
part of a strategic arsenal. 

===== PDF PAGE 451 =====
Additional 
Considerations 

===== PDF PAGE 452 =====


===== PDF PAGE 453 =====
Buying Options 
and Treasury Bills 
Numerous strategies have been described, ranging from the simple to the complex. 
Each one has advantages, but there are disadvantages as well. In fact, some of them 
may be too complex for the average investor to seriously consider implementing. The 
reader may feel that there should be an easier answer. Isn't there a strategy that 
might not require such a large investment or so much time spent in monitoring the 
position, but would still have a chance of returning a reasonable profit? In fact, there 
is a strategy that has not yet been described, a strategy considered by some experts 
in the field of mathematical analysis to be the best of them all. Simply stated, the 
strategy consists of putting 90% of one's money in risk-free investments (such as 
short-term Treasury bills) and buying options with the remaining 10% of one's funds. 
It has previously been pointed out that some of the more attractive strategies 
are those that involve small levels of risk with the potential for large profits. Usually, 
these types of strategies inherently have a rather large frequency of small losses, and 
a small probability of realizing large gains. Their advantage lies in the fact that one or 
two large profits can conceivably more than make up for numerous small losses. This 
Treasury bill/option strategy is another strategy of this type. 
HOW THE TREASURY BILL/OPTION STRATEGY OPERATES 
Although there are certain details involved in operating this strategy, it is basically a 
simple one to approach. First, the most that one can lose is 10%, less the interest 
earned on the fixed-income portion of his portfolio (the remaining 90% of his assets), 
during the life of the purchased options. It is a simple matter to space out one's com-
413 

===== PDF PAGE 454 =====
414 Part IV: Additional Considerations 
mitments to option purchases so that his overall risk in a one-year period can be kept 
down to nearly 10%. 
Example: An investor might decide to put 2½% of his money into three-month 
option purchases. Thus, in any one year, he would be 1isking 10%. At the same time 
he would be earning perhaps 6% from the overall interest generated on the fixed­
income securities that make up the remaining 90% of his assets. This would keep his 
overall risk down to approximately 4.6% per year. 
There are better ways to monitor this risk, and they are described shortly. The 
potential profits from this strategy are limited only by time. Since one is owning 
options - say call options - he could profit handsomely from a large upward move in 
the stock market. As with any strategy in which one has limited risk and the poten­
tial of large profits, a small number of large profits could offset a large number of 
small losses. In actual practice, of course, his profits will never be overwhelming, 
since only approximately 10% of the money is committed to option purchases. 
In total, this strategy has greatly reduced 1isk with the potential of making 
above-average profits. Since the 10% of the money that is invested in options gives 
great leverage, it might be possible for that portion to double or triple in a short time 
under favorable market conditions. This strategy is something like owning a convert­
ible bond. A convertible bond, since it is convertible into the common stock, moves 
up and down in price with the price of the underlying stock. However, if the stock 
should fall a great deal, the bond will not follow it all the way down, because eventu­
ally its yield will provide a "floor" for the price. 
A strategy that is not used very often is called the "synthetic convertible bond." 
One buys a debenture and a call option on the same stock. If the stock rises in price, 
the call does too, and so the combination of the debenture and the call acts much like 
a convertible bond would to the upside. If, on the other hand, the stock falls, the call 
will expire worthless; but the investor will retain most of his investment, because he 
will still have the debenture plus any interest that the bond has paid. 
The strategy of placing 90% of one's money into risk-free, interest-bearing cer­
tificates and buying options with the remainder is superior to the convertible bond 
or the "synthetic convertible bond," since there is no risk of price fluctuation in the 
largest portion of the investment. 
The Treasury bill/option strategy is fairly easy to operate, although one does 
have to do some work every time new options are purchased. Also, periodic adjust­
ments need to be made to keep the level of risk approximately the same at all times. 
As for which options to buy, the reader may recall that specifications were outlined 
in Chapters 3 and 16 on how to select the best option purchases. These criteria can 
be summarized briefly as follows: 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 36 | PDF PAGES 777-802 =====

===== PDF PAGE 777 =====
CHAPTER 36 
The Basics of 
Volatility Trading 
Volatility trading first attracted mathematically oriented traders who noticed that the 
market's prediction of forthcoming volatility - for example, implied volatility - was 
substantially out of line with what one might reasonably expect should happen. 
Moreover, many of these traders (market-makers, arbitrageurs, and others) had 
found great difficulties with keeping a "delta neutral" position neutral. Seeking a bet­
ter way to trade without having a market opinion on the underlying security, they 
turned to volatility trading. This is not to suggest that volatility trading eliminates all 
market risk, turning it all into volatility risk, for example. But it does suggest that a 
certain segment of the option trading population can handle the risk of volatility with 
more deference and aplomb than they can handle price risk 
Simply stated, it seems like a much easier task to predict volatility than to pre­
dict prices. That is said notwithstanding the great bull market of the 1990s, in which 
every investor who strongly participated certainly feels that he understands how to 
predict prices. Remember not to confuse brains with a bull market. Consider the chart 
in Figure 36-1. This seems as if it might be a good stock to trade: Buy it near the lows 
and sell it near the highs, perhaps even selling it short near the highs and covering 
when it later declines. It appears to have been in a trading range for a long time, so 
that after each purchase or sale, it returns at least to the midpoint of its trading range 
and sometimes even continues on to the other side of the range. There is no scale on 
the chart, but that doesn't change the fact that it appears to be a tradable entity. In 
fact, this is a chart of implied volatility of the options on a major U.S. corporation. It 
really doesn't matter which one (it's IBM), because the implied volatility chart of near­
ly every stock, index, or futures contract has a similar pattern - a trading range. The 
only time that implied volatility will totally break out of its "normal" range is if some­
thing material happens to change the fundamentals of the way the stock moves - a 
takeover bid, for example, or perhaps a major acquisition or other dilution of the stock 
727 

===== PDF PAGE 778 =====
728 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 36-1. 
A sample chart. 
Buy at these points. 
So, many traders observed this pattern and have become adherents of trying to 
predict volatility. Notice that if one is able to isolate volatility, he doesn't care where 
the stock price goes he is just concerned with buying volatility near the bottom of 
the range and selling it when it gets back to the middle or high end of the range, or 
vice versa. In real life, it is nearly impossible for a public customer to be able to iso­
late volatility so specifically. He will have to pay some attention to the stock price, but 
he still is able to establish positions in which the direction of the stock price is irrel­
evant to the outcome of the position. This quality is appealing to many investors, who 
have repeatedly found it difficult to predict stock prices. Moreover, an approach such 
as this should work in both bull and bear markets. Thus, volatility trading appeals to 
a great number of individuals. Just remember that, for you personally to operate a 
strategy properly, you must find that it appeals to your own philosophy of trading. 
Trying to use a strategy that you find uncomfortable will only lead to losses and frus­
tration. So, if this somewhat neutral approach to option trading sounds interesting to 
you, then read on. 
DEFINITIONS OF VOLATILITY 
Volatility is merely the term that is used to describe how fast a stock, future, or index 
changes in price. When one speaks of volatility in connection with options, there are 
two types of volatility that are important. The first is historical volatility, which is a 
measure of how fast the underlying instrument has been changing in price. The other 
is implied volatility, which is the option market's prediction of the volatility of the 

===== PDF PAGE 779 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 729 
underlying over the life of the option. The computation and comparison of these two 
measures can aid immensely in predicting the forthcoming volatility of the underly­
ing instrument - a crucial matter in determining today's option prices. 
Historical volatility can be measured with a specific formula, as shown in the · 
chapter on mathematical applications. It is merely the formula for standard deviation 
as contained in most elementary books on statistics. The important point to under­
stand is that it is an exact calculation, and there is little debate over how to compute 
historical volatility. It is not important to know what the actual measurement means. 
That is, if one says that a certain stock has a historical volatility of 20%, that by itself 
is a relatively meaningless number to anyone but an ardent statistician. However, it 
can be used for comparative purposes. 
The standard deviation is expressed as a percent. One can determine that the 
historical volatility of the broad stock market has usually been in the range of 15% to 
20%. A very volatile stock might have an historical volatility in excess of 100%. These 
numbers can be compared to each other, so that one might say that a stock with the 
latter historical volatility is five times more volatile that the "stock market." So, the 
historical volatility of one instrument can be compared with that of another instru­
ment in order to determine which one is more volatile. That in itself is a useful func­
tion of historical volatility, but its uses go much farther than that. 
Historical volatility can be measured over different time periods to give one a 
sense of how volatile the underlying has been over varying lengths of time. For exam­
ple, it is common to compute a 10-day historical volatility, as well as a 20-day, 50-day, 
and even 100-day. In each case, the results are annualized so that one can compare 
the figures directly. 
Consider the chart in Figure 36-2. It shows a stock (although it could be a 
futures contract or index, too) that was meandering in a rather tight range for quite 
some time. At the point marked "A" on the chart, it was probably at its least volatile. 
At that time, the 10-dayvolatility might have been something quite low, say 20%. The 
price movements directly preceding point A had been very small. However, prior to 
that time the stock had been more volatile, so longer-term measures of the historical 
volatility would shown higher numbers. The possible measures of historical volatility, 
then at point A, might have been something like: 
10-day historical volatility: 20% 
20-day historical volatility: 23% 
50-day historical volatility: 35% 
100-day historical volatility: 45% 
A pattern of historical volatilities of this sort describes a stock that has been 
slowing down lately. 

===== PDF PAGE 780 =====
730 
FIGURE 36-2. 
Sample stock chart. 
:::::::::r;~.w· r 
I 
, .. ~ 
n 
I 
ll•• ~N 
IT 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatllity 
: 
I 
I 
j 
j 
~ 
JI 
• I' 
'Vn ~- A 
Its price movements have been less extreme in the near term. 
Again referring to Figure 36-2, note that shortly after point A, the stock jumped 
much higher over a short period of time. Price action like this increases the implied 
volatility dramatically. And, at the far right edge of the chart, the stock had stopped 
rising but was swinging back and forth in far more rapid fashion than it had been at 
most other points on the chart. Violent action in a back-and-forth manner can often 
produce a higher historical volatility reading that straight-line move can; it's just the 
way the numbers work out. So, by the far right edge of the chart, the 10-day histori­
cal volatility would have increased rather dramatically, while the longer-term meas­
ures wouldn't be so high because they would still contain the price action that 
occurred prior to point A. 
At the far right edge of Figure 36-2, these figures might apply: 
l 0-day historical volatility: 80% 
20-day historical volatility: 75% 
50-day historical volatility: 60% 
l 00-day historical volatility: 55% 
With this alignment of historical volatilities, one can see that the stock has been 
more volatile recently than in the more distant past. In Chapter 38 on the distribu­
tion of stock prices, we will discuss in some detail just which one, if any, of these his­
torical volatilities one should use as "the" historical volatility input into option and 

===== PDF PAGE 781 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 731 
probability models. We need to be able to make volatility estimates in order to deter­
mine whether or not a strategy might be successful, and to determine whether the 
current option price is a relatively cheap one or a relatively expensive one. For exam­
ple, one can't just say, "I think XYZ is going to rise at least 18 points by February expi­
ration." There needs to be some basis in fact for such a statement and, lacking inside 
information about what the company might announce between now and February, 
that basis should be statistics in the form of volatility projections. 
Historical volatility is, of course, useful as an input to the (Black-Scholes) option 
model. In fact, the volatility input to any model is crucial because the volatility com­
ponent is such a major factor in determining the price of an option. Furthermore, 
historical volatility is useful for more than just estimating option prices. It is neces­
sary for making stock price projections and calculating distributions, too, as will be 
shown when those topics are discussed later. Any time one asks the question, "What 
is the probability of the stock moving from here to there, or of exceeding a particu­
lar target price?" the answer is heavily dependent on the volatility of the underlying 
stock (or index or futures). 
It is obvious from the above example that historical volatility can change dra­
matically for any particular instrument. Even if one were to stick with just one 
measure of historical volatility ( the 20-day historical is commonly the most popular 
measure), it changes with great frequency. Thus, one can never be certain that bas­
ing option price predictions or stock price distributions on the current historical 
volatility will yield the "correct" results. Statistical volatility may change as time 
goes forward, in which case your projections would be incorrect. Thus, it is impor­
tant to make projections that are on the conservative side. 
ANOTHER APPROACH: GARCH 
GARCH stands for Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity, 
which is why it's shortened to GARCH. It is a technique for forecasting volatility that 
some analysts say produces better projections than using historical volatility alone or 
implied volatility alone. GARCH was created in the 1980s by specialists in the field of 
econometrics. It incorporates both historical and implied volatility, plus one can throw 
in a constant ("fudge factor"). In essence, though, the user of GARCH volatility mod­
els has to make some predictions or decisions about the weighting of the factors used 
for the estimate. By its very nature, then, it can be just as vague as the situations 
described in the previous section. 
The model can "learn," though, if applied correctly. That is, if one makes a 
volatility prediction for today (using GARCH, let's say), but it turns out that the actu-

===== PDF PAGE 782 =====
732 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
al volatility was lower, then when you make the volatility prediction for tomorrow, 
you'll probably want to adjust it downward, using the experience of the real world, 
where you see volatility declining. This also incorporates the common-sense notion 
that volatility tends to remain the same; that is, tomorrow's volatility is likely to be 
much like today's. Of course, that's a little bit like saying tomorrow's weather is likely 
to be the same as today's (which it is, two-thirds of the time, according to statistics). 
It's just that when a tornado hits, you have to realize that your forecast could be wrong. 
The same thing applies to GAR CH volatility projections. They can be wrong, too. 
So, GARCH does not do a perfect job of estimating and forecasting volatility. In 
fact, it might not even be superior, from a strategist's viewpoint, to using the simple 
minimum/maximum techniques outlined in the previous section. It is really best 
geared to predicting short-term volatility and is favored most heavily by dealers in 
currency options who must adjust their markets constantly. For longer-term volatility 
projections, which is what a position trader of volatility is interested in, GARCH may 
not be all that useful. However, it is considered state-of-the-art as far as volatility pre­
dicting goes, so it has a following among theoretically oriented traders and analysts. 
MOVING AVERAGES 
Some traders try to use moving averages of daily composite implied volatility read­
ings, or use a smoothing of recent past historical volatility readings to make volatility 
estimates. As mentioned in the chapter on mathematical applications, once the com­
posite daily implied volatility has been computed, it was recommended that a 
smoothing effect be obtained by taking a moving average of the 20 or 30 days' 
implied volatilities. In fact, an exponential moving average was recommended, 
because it does not require one to keep accessing the last 20 or 30 days' worth of data 
in order to compute the moving average. Rather, the most recent exponential mov­
ing average is all that's needed in order to compute the next one. 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
Implied volatility has been mentioned many times already, but we want to expand on 
its concept before getting deeper into its measure and uses later in this section. 
Implied volatility pertains only to options, although one can aggregate the implied 
volatilities of the various options trading on a particular underlying instrument to 
produce a single number, which is often referred to as the implied volatility of the 
underlying. 

===== PDF PAGE 783 =====
732 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
al volatility was lower, then when you make the volatility prediction for tomorrow, 
you'll probably want to adjust it downward, using the experience of the real world, 
where you see volatility declining. This also incorporates the common-sense notion 
that volatility tends to remain the same; that is, tomorrow's volatility is likely to be 
much like today's. Of course, that's a little bit like saying tomorrow's weather is likely 
to be the same as today's (which it is, two-thirds of the time, according to statistics). 
It's just that when a tornado hits, you have to realize that your forecast could be wrong. 
The same thing applies to GARCH volatility projections. They can be wrong, too. 
So, GARCH does not do a perfect job of estimating and forecasting volatility. In 
fact, it might not even be superior, from a strategist's viewpoint, to using the simple 
minimum/maximum techniques outlined in the previous section. It is really best 
geared to predicting short-term volatility and is favored most heavily by dealers in 
currency options who must adjust their markets constantly. For longer-term volatility 
projections, which is what a position trader of volatility is interested in, GAR CH may 
not be all that useful. However, it is considered state-of-the-art as far as volatility pre­
dicting goes, so it has a following among theoretically oriented traders and analysts. 
MOVING AVERAGES 
Some traders try to use moving averages of daily composite implied volatility read­
ings, or use a smoothing of recent past historical volatility readings to make volatility 
estimates. As mentioned in the chapter on mathematical applications, once the com­
posite daily implied volatility has been computed, it was recommended that a 
smoothing effect be obtained by taking a moving average of the 20 or 30 days' 
implied volatilities. In fact, an exponential moving average was recommended, 
because it does not require one to keep accessing the last 20 or 30 days' worth of data 
in order to compute the moving average. Rather, the most recent exponential mov­
ing average is all that's needed in order to compute the next one. 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
Implied volatility has been mentioned many times already, but we want to expand on 
its concept before getting deeper into its measure and uses later in this section. 
Implied volatility pertains only to options, although one can aggregate the implied 
volatilities of the various options trading on a particular underlying instrument to 
produce a single number, which is often referred to as the implied volatility of the 
underlying. 

===== PDF PAGE 784 =====
732 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
al volatility was lower, then when you make the volatility prediction for tomorrow, 
you'll probably want to adjust it downward, using the experience of the real world, 
where you see volatility declining. This also incorporates the common-sense notion 
that volatility tends to remain the same; that is, tomorrow's volatility is likely to be 
much like today's. Of course, that's a little bit like saying tomorrow's weather is likely 
to be the same as today's (which it is, two-thirds of the time, according to statistics). 
It's just that when a tornado hits, you have to realize that your forecast could be wrong. 
The same thing applies to GARCH volatility projections. They can be wrong, too. 
So, GAR CH does not do a perfect job of estimating and forecasting volatility. In 
fact, it might not even be superior, from a strategist's viewpoint, to using the simple 
minimum/maximum techniques outlined in the previous section. It is really best 
geared to predicting short-term volatility and is favored most heavily by dealers in 
currency options who must adjust their markets constantly. For longer-term volatility 
projections, which is what a position trader of volatility is interested in, GARCH may 
not be all that useful. However, it is considered state-of-the-art as far as volatility pre­
dicting goes, so it has a following among theoretically oriented traders and analysts. 
MOVING AVERAGES 
Some traders try to use moving averages of daily composite implied volatility read­
ings, or use a smoothing of recent past historical volatility readings to make volatility 
estimates. As mentioned in the chapter on mathematical applications, once the com­
posite daily implied volatility has been computed, it was recommended that a 
smoothing effect be obtained by taking a moving average of the 20 or 30 days' 
implied volatilities. In fact, an exponential moving average was recommended, 
because it does not require one to keep accessing the last 20 or 30 days' worth of data 
in order to compute the moving average. Rather, the most recent exponential mov­
ing average is all that's needed in order to compute the next one. 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
Implied volatility has been mentioned many times already, but we want to expand on 
its concept before getting deeper into its measure and uses later in this section. 
Implied volatility pertains only to options, although one can aggregate the implied 
volatilities of the various options trading on a particular underlying instrument to 
produce a single number, which is often referred to as the implied volatility of the 
underlying. 

===== PDF PAGE 785 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 733 
At any one point in time, a trader knows for certain the following items that 
affect an option's price: stock price, strike price, time to expiration, interest rate, and 
dividends. The only remaining factor is volatility - in fact, implied volatility. It is the 
big "fudge factor" in option trading. If implied volatility is too high, options will be 
overpriced. That is, they will be relatively expensive. On the other hand, if implied 
volatility is too low, options will be cheap or underpriced. The terms "overpriced" and 
"underpriced" are not really used by theoretical option traders much anymore, 
because their usage implies that one knows what the option should be worth. In the 
modem vernacular, one would say that the options are trading with a "high implied 
volatility" or a "low implied volatility," meaning that one has some sense of where 
implied volatility has been in the past, and the current measure is thus high or low in 
comparison. 
Essentially, implied volatility is the option market's guess at the forthcoming sta­
tistical volatility of the underlying over the life of the option in question. If traders 
believe that the underlying will be volatile over the life of the option, then they will 
bid up the option, making it more highly priced. Conversely, if traders envision a non­
volatile period for the stock, they will not pay up for the option, preferring to bid 
lower; hence the option will be relatively low-priced. The important thing to note is 
that traders normally do not know the future. They have no way of knowing, for sure, 
how volatile the underlying is going to be during the life of the option. 
Having said that, it would be unrealistic to assume that inside information does 
not leak into the marketplace. That is, if certain people possess nonpublic knowledge 
about a company's earnings, new product announcement, takeover bid, and so on, 
they will aggressively buy or bid for the options and that will increase implied volatil­
ity. So, in certain cases, when one sees that implied volatility has shot up quickly, it is 
perhaps a signal that some traders do indeed know the future - at least with respect 
to a specific corporate announcement that is about to be made. 
However, most of the time there is not anyone trading with inside information. 
Yet, every option trader - market-maker and public alike - is forced to make a 
"guess" about volatility when he buys or sells an option. That is true because the price 
he pays is heavily influenced by his volatility estimate ( whether or not he realizes that 
he is, in fact, making such a volatility estimate). As you might imagine, most traders 
have no idea what volatility is going to be during the life of the option. They just pay 
prices that seem to make sense, perhaps based on historic volatility. Consequently, 
today's implied volatility may bear no resemblance to the actual statistical volatility 
that later unfolds during the life of the option. 
For those who desire a more mathematical definition of implied volatility, con­
sider this. 

===== PDF PAGE 786 =====
734 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatillty 
Opt price = f(Stock price, Strike price, Time, Risk-free rate, Volatility, Dividends) 
Furthermore, suppose that one knows the following information: 
XYZ price: 52 
April 50 call price: 6 
Time remaining to April expiration: 36 days 
Dividends: $0.00 
Risk-free interest rate: 5% 
This information, which is available for every option at any time, simply from an 
option quote, gives us everything except the implied volatility. So what volatility 
would one have to plug in the Black-Scholes model ( or whatever model one is using) 
to make the model give the answer 6 (the current price of the option)? That is, what 
volatility is necessary to solve the equation? 
6 = f(52, 50, 36 days, 5%, Volatility, $0.00) 
Whatever volatility is necessary to make the model yield the current market price (6) 
as its value, is the implied volatility for the XYZ April 50 call. In this case, if you're 
interested, the implied volatility is 75.4%. The actual process of determining implied 
volatility is an iterative one. There is no formula, per se. Rather, one keeps trying var­
ious volatility estimates in the model until the answer is close enough to the market 
value. 
THE VOLATILITY OF VOLATILITY 
In order to discuss the implied volatility of a particular entity - stock, index, or 
futures contract one generally refers to the implied volatility of individual options 
or perhaps the composite implied volatility of the entire option series. This is gener­
ally good enough for strategic comparisons. However, it turns out that there might be 
other ways to consider looking at implied volatility. In paiticular, one might want to 
consider how wide the range of implied volatility is - that is, how volatile the indi­
vidual implied volatility numbers are. 
It is often conventional to talk about the percentile of implied volatility. That is 
a way to rank the current implied volatility reading with past readings for the same 
underlying instrument. 
However, a fairly important ingredient is missing when percentiles are involved. 
One can't really tell if "cheap" options are cheap as a practical matter. That's because 
one doesn't know how tightly packed together the past implied volatility readings are. 
For example, if one were to discover that the entire past range of implied volatility 
for XYZ stretched only from 39% to 45%, then a current reading of 40%, while low, 

===== PDF PAGE 787 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 135 
might not seem all that attractive. That is, if the first percentile of XYZ options were 
at an implied volatility reading of 39% and the 100th percentile were at 45%, then a 
reading of 40% is really quite mundane. There just wouldn't be much room for 
implied volatility to increase on an absolute basis. Even if it rose to the 100th per­
centile, an individual XYZ option wouldn't gain much value, because its implied 
volatility would only be increasing from about 40% to 45%. 
However, if the distribution of past implied volatility is wide, then one can truly 
say the options are cheap if they are currently in a low percentile. Suppose, rather 
than the tight range described above, that the range of past implied volatilities for 
XYZ instead stretched from 35% to 90% - that the first percentile for XYZ implied 
volatility was at 35% and the 100th percentile was at 90%. Now, if the current read­
ing is 40%, there is a large range above the current reading into which the options 
could trade, thereby potentially increasing the value of the options if implied volatil­
ity moved up to the higher percentiles. 
What this means, as a practical matter, is that one not only needs to know the 
current percentile of implied volatility, but he also needs to know the range of num­
bers over which that percentile was derived. If the range is wide, then an extreme 
percentile truly represents a cheap or expensive option. But if the range is tight, then 
one should probably not be overly concerned with the current percentile of implied 
volatility. 
Another facet of implied volatility that is often overlooked is how it ranges with 
respect to the time left in the option. This is particularly important for traders of 
LEAPS (long-term) options, for the range of implied volatility of a LEAPS option will 
not be as great as that of a short-term option. In order to demonstrate this, the 
implied volatilities of $OEX options, both regular and LEAPS, were charted over 
several years. The resulting scatter diagram is shown in Figure 36-3. 
Two curved lines are drawn on Figure 36-3. They contain most of the data 
points. One can see from these lines that the range of implied volatility for near-term 
options is greater than it is for longer-term options. For example, the implied volatil­
ity readings on the far left of the scatter diagram range from about 14% to nearly 40% 
(ignore the one outlying point). However, for longer-term options of 24 months or 
more, the range is about 17% to 32%. While $0EX options have their own idiosyn­
cracies, this scatter diagram is fairly typical of what we would see for any stock or 
index option. 
One conclusion that we can draw from this is that LEAPS option implied 
volatilities just don't change nearly as much as those of short-term options. That can 
be an important piece of information for a LEAPS option trader especially if he is 
comparing the LEAPS implied volatility with a composite implied volatility or with 
the historical volatility of the underlying. 

===== PDF PAGE 788 =====
736 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Once again, consider Figure 36-3. While it is difficult to discern from the graph 
alone, the 10th percentile of $OEX composite implied volatility, using all of the data 
points given, is 17%. The line that marks this level (the tenth percentile) is noted on 
the right side of the scatter diagram. It is quite easy to see that the LEAPS options 
rarely trade at that low volatility level. 
In Figure 36-3, the distance between the curved lines is much greater on the 
left side (i.e., for shorter-term options) than it is on the right side (for longer-term 
options). Thus, it's difficult for the longer-term options to register either an extreme­
ly high or extremely low implied volatility reading, when all of the options are con­
sidered. Consequently, LEAPS options will rarely appear "cheap" when one looks at 
their percentile of implied volatility, including all the short-term options, too: 
One might say that, if he were going to buy long-term options, he should look 
only at the size of the volatility range on the right side of the scatter diagram. Then, 
he could make his decision about whether the options are cheap or not by only com­
paring the current reading to past readings of long-term options. This line of think­
ing, though, is somewhat fallacious reasoning, for a couple of reasons: First, if one 
holds the option for any long period of time, the volatility range will widen out and 
there is a chance that implied volatility could drop substantially. Second, the long­
term volatility range might be so small that, even though the options are initially 
cheap, quick increase in implied volatility over several deciles might not translate into 
much of a gain in price in the short term. 
FIGURE 36-3. Implied volatilities of $OEX options over several 
years. 
50 
45 
40 
~ 35 
~ 30 
g 25 "O 
.91 20 C. 
E 15 -0th 
10 
5 
0 
0 10 20 30 40 
Time to Expiration (months) 

===== PDF PAGE 789 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics ol Volatility Trading 737 
It's important for anyone using implied volatility in his trading decisions to 
understand that the range of past implied volatilities is important, and to realize that 
the volatility range expands as time shrinks. 
IS IMPLIED VOLATILITY A GOOD PREDICTOR OF ACTUAL VOLATILITY? 
The fact that one can calculate implied volatility does not mean that the calculation 
is a good estimate of forthcoming volatility. As stated above, the marketplace does not 
really know how volatile an instrument is going to be, any more than it knows the 
forthcoming price of the stock. There are clues, of course, and some general ways of 
estimating forthcoming volatility, but the fact remains that sometimes options trade 
with an implied volatility that is quite a bit out of line with past levels. Therefore, 
implied volatility may be considered to be an inaccurate estimate of what is really 
going to happen to the stock during the life of the option. Just remember that implied 
volatility is a forward-looking estimate, and since it is based on traders' suppositions, 
it can be wrong - just as any estimate of future events can be in error. 
The question posed above is one that should probably be asked more often than 
it is: "Is implied volatility a good predictor of actual volatility?" Somehow, it seems 
logical to assume that implied and historical (actual) volatility will converge. That's 
not really true, at least not in the short term. Moreover, even if they do converge, 
which one was right to begin with - implied or historical? That is, did implied volatil­
ity move to get more in line with actual movements of the underlying, or did the 
stock's movement speed up or slow down to get in line with implied volatility? 
To illustrate this concept, a few charts will be used that show the comparison 
between implied and historical volatility. Figure 36-4 shows information for the 
$0EX Index. In general, $0EX options are overpriced. See the discussion in 
Chapter 29. That is, implied volatility of $0EX options is almost always higher than 
what actual volatility turns out to be. Consider Figure 36-4. There are three lines in 
the figure: (a) implied volatility, (b) actual volatility, and (c) the difference between 
the two. There is an important distinction here, though, as to what comprises these 
curves: 
(a) The implied volatility curve depicts the 20-day moving average of daily compos­
ite implied volatility readings for $0EX. That is, each day one number is com­
puted as a composite implied volatility for $0EX for that day. These implied 
volatility figures are computed using the averaging formula shown in the chapter 
on mathematical applications, whereby each option's implied volatility is weight­
ed by trading volume and by distance in- or out-of-the-money, to arrive at a sin­
gle composite implied volatility reading for the trading day. To smooth out those 
daily readings, a 20-day simple moving average is used. This daily implied volatil-

===== PDF PAGE 790 =====
738 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 36-4. 
$OEX implied versus historical volatility. 
10 
Implied minus Actual 1999 Date 
ity of $OEX options encompasses all the $OEX options, so it is different from the 
Volatility Index ($VIX), which uses only the options closest to the money. By 
using all of the options, a slightly different volatility figure is arrived at, as com­
pared to $VIX, but a chart of the two would show similar patterns. That is, peaks 
in implied volatility computed using all of the $OEX options occur at the same 
points in time as peaks in $VIX. 
(b) The actual volatility on the graph is a little different from what one normally 
thinks of as historical volatility. It is the 20-day historical volatility, computed 20 
days later than the date of the implied volatility calculation. Hence, points on the 
implied volatility curve are matched with a 20-day historical volatility calculation 
that was made 20 days later. Thus, the two curves more or less show the predic­
tion of volatility and what actually happened over the 20-day period. These actu­
al volatility readings are smoothed as well, with a 20-day moving average. 
(c) The difference between the two is quite simple, and is shown as the bottom 
curve on the graph. A "zero" line is drawn through the difference. 
When this "difference line" passes through the zero line, the projection of 
volatility and what actually occurred 20 days later were equal. If the difference line 
is above the zero line, then implied volatility was too high; the options were over­
priced. Conversely, if the difference line is below the zero line, then actual volatility 
turned out to be greater than implied volatility had anticipated. The options were 
underpriced in that case. Those latter areas are shaded in Figure 36-4. Simplistically, 
you would want to own options during the shaded periods on the chart, and would 
want to be a seller of options during the non-shaded areas. 

===== PDF PAGE 791 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 739 
Note that Figure 36-4 indeed confirms the fact that $OEX options are consis­
tently overpriced. Very few charts are as one-dimensional as the $OEX chart, where 
the options were so consistently overpriced. Most stocks find the difference line 
oscillating back and forth about the zero mark. Consider Figures 36-5 and 36-6. 
Figure 36-5 shows a chart similar to Figure 36-4, comparing actual and implied 
volatility, and their difference, for a particular stock. Figure 36-6 shows the price 
graph of that same stock, overlaid on implied volatility, during the period up to and 
including the heavy shading. 
The volatility comparison chart (Figure 36-5) shows several shaded areas, dur­
ing which the stock was more volatile than the options had predicted. Owners of 
options profited during these times, provided they had a more or less neutral outlook 
on the stock. Figure 36-6 shows the stock's performance up to and including the 
March-April 1999 period - the largest shaded area on the chart. Note that implied 
volatility was quite low before the stock made the strong move from 10 to 30 in little 
more than a month. These graphs are taken from actual data and demonstrate just 
how badly out of line implied volatility can be. In February and early March 1999, 
implied volatility was at or near the lowest levels on these charts. Yet, by the end of 
March, a major price explosion had begun in the stock, one that tripled its value in 
just over a month. Clearly, implied volatility was a poor predictor of forthcoming 
actual volatility in this case. 
What about later in the year? In Figure 36-5, one can observe that implied and 
actual volatility oscillated back and forth quite a few times during the rest of 1999. It 
might appear that these oscillations are small and that implied volatility was actually 
doing a pretty good job of predicting actual volatility, at least until the final spike in 
December 1999. However, looking at the scale on the left-hand side of Figure 36-5, 
one can see that implied volatility was trying to remain in the 50% to 60% range, but 
actual volatility kept bolting higher rather frequently. 
One more example will be presented. Figures 36-7 and 36-8 depict another 
stock and its volatilities. On the left half of each graph, implied volatility was quite 
high. It was higher than actual volatility turned out to be, so the difference line in 
Figure 36-7 remains above the zero line for several months. Then, for some reason, 
the option market decided to make an adjustment, and implied volatility began to 
drop. Its lowest daily point is marked with a circle in Figure 36-8, and the same point 
in time is marked with a similar circle in Figure 36-7. At that time, options traders 
were "saying" that they expected the stock to be very tame over the ensuing weeks. 
Instead, the stock made two quick moves, one from 15 down to 11, and then anoth­
er back up to 17. That movement jerked actual volatility higher, but implied volatili­
ty remained rather low. After a period of trading between 13 and 15, during which 
time implied volatility remained low, the stock finally exploded to the upside, as evi­
denced by the spikes on the right-hand side of both Figures 36-7 and 36-8. Thus, 

===== PDF PAGE 792 =====
740 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 36-5. 
Implied versus historical volatility of a stock. 
150 
140 
130 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
oi--""""'""""',,,.....""' -10 
-20 
-30 "O 
-40 ct! 
-50 ~ 
-80 0. 
-701'-'-=CIJ+---+---+--+; 
-80 
1999 
FIGURE 36-6. 
Implied minus Actual 
The price graph of the stock. 
. . . 
•• , •••••••• ,. •••••••• .,. ••• + ••••••••••• ••••• -~······ •••••• ,. ••••••••••• ·t . ······ . . . ... [" 
·· · ·· ·· ··· ·· · · · Stock Price · ·· · : ·· ·· I 
~ !'"Y"d"'il~tilirrs::•of'T! 
' ' .· ............ ; ·--·•·····! ............ · ................ : ............... : ...........•.. :. 
············•·:••············•:•···········•;••·············(·········•: Implied Volatility 
98 0 N D J F M A M 99 
29.000 
27.000 
25.000 
23.000 
21.000 
19.000 
17.000 
15.000 
13.000 
11.000 
9.000 
7.000 
5.000 
Date 

===== PDF PAGE 793 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 
FIGURE 36-7. 
Implied versus historical volatility of a stock. 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
01-----------~~r:cr:1---
-10 "O 
-20 ~ 
-30"5" F M A M J J A S O N D-
Implied minus Actual 1999 
FIGURE 36-8. 
The price graph of the stock • 
... : ....... --: ......... : ·······.··········, ····-·-:· ....... : ........ ..; ... . 
······: ---:·······•: J. ...... 1 ....... ) ....... --) .... ----1 .).. ! .). 
······-·········-··· -.. ;..... : ...... ;.. . : ......... : .... . 
...... .: ......... : .......... : .......... : ....... , ......... •. 
..... ; ...... ) ....... .L.. ... .L .. Stock· Pri~e ..... ) ...... ) .. . 
·······'• ...... _.: ____ .... •. ·······:----
.•.•••• j ' . 
J F M A M J J A S 0 N D J 
1999 
Date 
27.000 
25.000 
23.000 
21.000 
19.000 
17.000 
15.000 
13.000 
11.000 
9.000 
7.000 
5.000 
741 

===== PDF PAGE 794 =====
742 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
implied volatility was a poor predictor of actual volatility for most of the time on these 
graphs. Moreover, implied volatility remained low at the right-hand side of the charts 
(January 2000) even though the stock doubled in the course of a month. 
The important thing to note from these figures is that they clearly show that 
implied volatility is really not a very good predictor of the actual volatility that is to 
follow. If it were, the difference line would hover near zero most of the time. Instead, 
it swings back and forth wildly, with implied volatility over- or underestimating actu­
al volatility by quite wide levels. Thus, the current estimates of volatility by traders 
(i.e., implied volatility) can actually be quite wrong. 
Conversely, one could also say that historical volatility is not a great predictor of 
volatility that is to follow, either, especially in the short term. No one really makes any 
claims that it is a good predictor, for historical volatility is merely a reflection of what 
has happened in the past. All we can say for sure is that implied and historical volatil­
ity tend to trade within a range. 
One thing that does stand out on these charts is that implied volatility seems to 
fluctuate less than actual volatility. That seems to be a natural function of the volatil­
ity predictive process. For example, when the market collapses, implied volatilities of 
options rise only modestly. This can be observed by again referring to Figure 36-4, 
the $0EX option example. The only shaded area on the graph occurred when the 
market had a rather sharp sell-off during October 1999. In previous years, when 
there had been even more severe market declines (October 1997 or August-October 
1998) $0EX actual volatility had briefly moved above implied volatility (this data for 
1997 and 1998 is shown in Figure 36-9). In other words, option traders and market­
makers are predicting volatility when they price options, and one tends to make a 
FIGURE 36-9. 
$OEX implied versus historical volatility, 1997-1998. 
Actual 
40 
30 
10 
0 
D J F M A 
-20 1997 1998 

===== PDF PAGE 795 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 743 
prediction that is somewhat "middle of the road," since an extreme prediction is 
more likely to be wrong. Of course, it turns out to be wrong anyway, since actual 
volatility jumps around quite rapidly. 
The few charts that have been presented here don't constitute a rigorous study 
upon which to draw the conclusion that implied volatility is a poor predictor of actu­
al volatility, but it is this author's firm opinion that that statement is true. A graduate 
student looking for a master's thesis topic could take it from here. 
VOLATILITY TRADING 
As a result of the fact that implied volatility can sometimes be at irrational extremes, 
options may sometimes trade with implied volatilities that are significantly out of line 
with what one would normally expect. For example, suppose a stock is in a relatively 
nonvolatile period, like the price of the stock in Figure 36-2, just before point A on 
the graph. During that time, option sellers would probably become more aggressive 
while option buyers, who probably have been seeing their previous purchases decay­
ing with time, become more timid. As a result, option prices drop. Alternatively stat­
ed, implied volatility drops. When implied volatilities are decreasing, option sellers 
are generally happy (and may often become more aggressive), while option buyers 
are losing money (and may often tend to become more timid). This is just a function 
of looking at the profit and loss statements in one's option account. But anyone who 
took a longer backward look at the volatility of the stock in Figure 36-2 would see that 
it had been much more volatile in the past. Consequently, he might decide that the 
implied volatility of the options had gotten too low and he would be a buyer of 
options. 
It is the volatility trader's objective to spot situations when implied volatility is 
possibly or probably erroneous and to take a position that would profit when the 
error is brought to light. Thus, the volatility trader's main objective is spotting situa­
tions when implied volatility is overvalued or undervalued, irrespective of his outlook 
for the underlying stock itself. In some ways, this is not so different from the funda­
mental stock analyst who is attempting to spot overvalued or undervalued stocks, 
based on earnings and other fundamentals. 
From another viewpoint, volatility trading is also a contrarian theory of invest­
ing. That is, when everyone else thinks the underlying is going to be nonvolatile, the 
volatility trader buys volatility. When everyone else is selling options and option buy­
ers are hard to find, the volatility trader steps up to buy options. Of course, some rig­
orous analysis must be done before the volatility trader can establish new positions, 
but when those situations come to light, it is most likely that he is taking positions 
opposite to what "the masses" are doing. He will be buying volatility when the major-

===== PDF PAGE 796 =====
744 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
ity has been selling it (or at least, when the majority is refusing to buy it), and he will 
be selling volatility when everyone else is panicking to buy options, making them 
quite expensive. 
WHY DOES VOLATILITY REACH EXTREMES? 
One can't just buy every option that he considers to be cheap. There must be some 
consideration given to what the probabilities of stock movement are. Even more 
important, one can't just sell every option that he values as expensive. There may be 
valid reasons why options become expensive, not the least of which is that someone 
may have inside information about some forthcoming corporate news (a takeover or 
an earnings surprise, for example). 
Since options off er a good deal of leverage, they are an attractive vehicle to any­
one who wants to make a quick trade, especially if that person believes he knows 
something that the general public doesn't know. Thus, if there is a leak of a takeover 
rumor - whether it be from corporate officers, investment bankers, printers, or 
accountants - whoever possesses that information may quite likely buy options 
aggressively, or at least bid for them. Whenever demand for an option outstrips sup­
ply - in this case, the major supplier is probably the market-maker - the options 
quickly get more expensive. That is, implied volatility increases. 
In fact, there are financial analysts and reporters who look for large increases in 
trading volume as a clue to which stocks might be ready to make a big move. 
Invariably, if the trading volume has increased and if implied volatility has increased 
as well, it is a good warning sign that someone with inside information is buying the 
options. In such a case, it might not be a good idea to sell volatility, even though the 
options are mathematically expensive. 
Sometimes, even more minor news items are known in advance by a small seg­
ment of the investing community. If those items will be enough to move the stock 
even a couple of points, those who possess the information may try to buy options in 
advance of the news. Such minor news items might include the resignation or firing 
of a high-ranking corporate officer, or perhaps some strategic alliance with another 
company, or even a new product announcement. 
The seller of volatility can watch for two things as warning signs that perhaps 
the options are "predicting" a corporate event (and hence should be avoided as a 
"volatility sale"). Those two things are a dramatic increase in option volume or a sud­
den jump in implied volatility of the options. One or both can be caused by traders 
with inside information trying to obtain a leveraged instrument in advance of the 
actual corporate news item being made public. 

===== PDF PAGE 797 =====
Chapter 36: The Basics of Volatility Trading 745 
A SUDDEN INCREASE IN OPTION VOLUME OR IMPLIED VOLATILITY 
The symptoms of insider trading, as evidenced by a large increase in option trading 
activity, can be recognized. Typically, the majority of the increased volume occurs in 
the near-term option series, particularly the at-the-money strike and perhaps the next 
strike out-of-the-money. The activity doesn't cease there, however. It propagates out 
to other option series as market-makers (who by the nature of their job function are 
short the near-term options that those with insider knowledge are buying) snap up 
everything on the books that they can find. In addition, the market-makers may try 
to entice others, perhaps institutions, to sell some expensive calls against a portion of 
their institutional stock holdings. Activity of this sort should be a warning sign to the 
volatility seller to stand aside in this situation. 
Of course, on any given day there are many stocks whose options are extraordi­
narily active, but the increase in activity doesn't have anything to do with insider trad­
ing. This might include a large covered call write or maybe a large put purchase 
established by an institution as a hedge against an existing stock position, or a rela­
tively large conversion or reversal arbitrage established by an arbitrageur, or even a 
large spread transaction initiated by a hedge fund. In any of these cases, option vol­
ume would jump dramatically, but it wouldn't mean that anyone had inside knowl­
edge about a forthcoming corporate event. Rather, the increases in option trading 
volume as described in this paragraph are merely functions of the normal workings 
of the marketplace. 
What distinguishes these arbitrage and hedging activities from the machina­
tions of insider trading is: (1) There is little propagation of option volume into other 
series in the "benign" case, and (2) the stock price itself may languish. However, 
when true insider activity is present, the market-makers react to the aggressive 
nature of the call buying. These market-makers know they need to hedge themselves, 
because they do not want to be short naked call options in case a takeover bid or 
some other news spurs the stock dramatically higher. As mentioned earlier, they try 
to buy up any other options offered in "the book," but there may not be many of 
those. So, as a last result, the way they reduce their negative position delta is to buy 
stock. Thus, if the options are active and expensive, and if the stock is rising too, you 
probably have a reasonably good indication that "someone knows something." 
However, if the options are expensive but none of the other factors are present, espe­
cially if the stock is declining in price - then one might feel more comfortable with a 
strategy of selling volatility in this case. 
However, there is a case in which options might be the object of pursuit by 
someone with insider knowledge, yet not be accompanied by heavy trading volume. 
This situation could occur with illiquid options. In this case, a floor broker holding 

===== PDF PAGE 798 =====
746 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
the order of those with insider information might come into the pit to buy options, 
but the market-makers may not sell them many, preferring to raise their offering 
price rather than sell a large quantity. If this happens a few times in a row, the options 
will have gotten very expensive as the floor broker raises his bid price repeatedly, but 
only buys a few contracts each time. Meanwhile, the market-maker keeps raising his 
offering price. 
Eventually, the floor broker concludes that the options are too expensive to 
bother with and walks away. Perhaps his client then buys stock. In any case, what has 
happened is that the options have gotten very expensive as the bids and offers were 
repeatedly raised, but not much option volume was actually traded because of the 
illiquidity of the contracts. Hence the normal warning light associated with a sudden 
increase in option volume would not be present. In this case, though, a volatility sell­
er should still be careful, because he does not want to step in to sell calls right before 
some major corporate news item is released. The clue here is that implied volatility 
literally exploded in a short period of time (one day, or actually less time), and that 
alone should be enough warning to a volatility seller. 
The point that should be taken here is that when options suddenly become very 
expensive, especially if accompanied by strong stock price movement and strong 
stock volume, there may very well be a good reason why that is happening. That rea­
son will probably become public knowledge shortly in the form of a news event. In 
fact, a major market-maker once said he believed that rrwst increases in implied 
volatility were eventually justified - that is, some corporate news item was released 
that made the stock jump. Hence, a volatility seller should avoid situations such as 
these. Any sudden increase in implied volatility should probably be viewed as a 
potential news story in the making. These situations are not what a neutral volatility 
seller wants to get into. 
On the other hand, if options have become expensive as a result of corporate 
news, then the volatility seller can feel more comfortable making a trade. Perhaps the 
company has announced poor earnings and the stock has taken a beating while 
implied volatility rose. In this situation, one can assess the information and analyze it 
clearly; he is not dealing with some hidden facts known to only a few insider traders. 
With clear analysis, one might be able to develop a volatility selling strategy that is 
prudent and potentially profitable. 
Another situation in which options become expensive in the wake of market 
action is during a bear market in the underlying. This can be true for indices, stocks, 
and futures contracts. The Crash of '87 is an extreme example, but implied volatility 
shot through the roof during the crash. Other similar sharp market collapses - such 
as October 1989, October 1997, and August-September 1998 - caused implied 
volatility to jump dramatically. In these situations, the volatility seller knows why 

===== PDF PAGE 799 =====
Chapter 31,: 1be Basics of Volatility Trading 747 
implied volatility is high. Given that fact, he can then construct positions around a 
neutral strategy or around his view of the future. The time when the volatility seller 
must be careful is when the options are expensive and no one seems to know why. 
That's when insider trading may be present, and that's when the volatility seller 
should defer from selling options. 
CHEAP OPTIONS 
When options are cheap, there are usually far less discernible reasons why they have 
become cheap. An obvious one may be that the corporate structure of the company 
has changed; perhaps it is being taken over, or perhaps the company· has acquired 
another company nearly its size. In either case, it is possible that the combined enti­
ty's stock will be less volatile than the original company's stock was. As the takeover 
is in the process of being consummated, the implied volatility of the company's 
options will drop, giving the false impression that they are cheap. 
In a similar vein, a company may mature, perhaps issuing more shares of stock, 
or perhaps building such a.., good earnings stream that the stock is considered less 
volatile than it formerly was. Some of the Internet companies will be classic cases: In 
the beginning they were high-flying stocks with plenty of price movement, so the 
options traded with a relatively high degree of implied volatility. However, as the com­
pany matures, it buys other Internet companies and then perhaps even merges with a 
large, established company (America Online and Time-Warner Communications, for 
example). In these cases, actual (statistical) volatility will diminish as the company 
matures, and implied volatility will do the same. On the surface, a buyer of volatility 
may see the reduced volatility as an attractive buying situation, but upon further 
inspection he may find that it is justified. If the decrease in implied volatility seems 
justified, a buyer of volatility should ignore it and look for other opportunities. 
All volatility traders should be suspicious when volatility seems to be extreme -
either too expensive or too cheap. The trader should investigate the possibilities as to 
why volatility is trading at such extreme levels. In some cases, the supply and demand 
of the public just pushes the options to extreme levels; there is nothing more involved 
than that. Those are the best volatility trading situations. However, if there is a hint 
that the volatility has gotten to an extreme reading because of some logical (but per­
haps nonpublic) reason, then the volatility trader should be suspicious and should 
probably avoid the trade. Typically this happens with expensive options. 
Buyers of volatility really have little to fear if they miscalculate and thus buy an 
option that appears inexpensive but turns out not to be, in reality. The volatility buyer 
might lose money if he does this, and overpaying for options constantly will lead to 
ruin, but an occasional mistake will probably not be fatal. 

===== PDF PAGE 800 =====
748 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Sellers of volatility, however, have to be a lot more careful. One mistake could 
be the last one. Selling naked calls that seem terrifically expensive by historic stan­
dards could be ruinous if a takeover bid subsequently emerges at a large premium to 
the stock's current price. Even put sellers must be careful, although a lot of traders 
think that selling naked puts is safe because it's the same as buying stock. But who 
ever said buying stock wasn't risky? If the stock literally collapses - falling from 80, 
say, to 15 or 20, as Oxford Health did, or from 30 to 2 as Sunrise Technology did -
then a put seller will be buried. Since the risk of loss from naked option selling is 
large, one could be wiped out by a huge gap opening. That's why it's imperative to 
study why the options are expensive before one sells them. If it's known, for exam­
ple, that a small biotech company is awaiting FDA trial results in two weeks,~and all 
the options suddenly become expensive, the volatility seller should not attempt to be 
a hero. It's obvious that at least some traders believe that there is a chance for the 
stock to gap in price dramatically. It would be better to find some other situation in 
which to sell options. 
The seller of futures options or index options should be cautious too, although 
there can't be takeovers in those markets, nor can there be a huge earnings surprise 
or other corporate event that causes a big gap. The futures markets, though do have 
things like crop reports and government economic data to deal with, and those can 
create volatile situations, too. The bottom line is that volatility selling - even hedged 
volatility selling - can be taxing and aggravating if one has sold volatility in front of 
what turns out to be a news item that justifies the expensive volatility. 
SUMMARY 
Volatility trading is a predictable way to approach the market, because volatility 
almost invariably trades in a range and therefore its value can be estimated with a 
great deal more precision than can the actual prices of the underlyings. Even so, one 
must be careful in his approach to volatility trading, because diligent research is 
needed to determine if, in fact, volatility is "cheap" or "expensive." As with any sys­
tematic approach to the market, if one is sloppy about his research, he cannot expect 
to achieve superior results. In the next few chapters, a good deal of time will be spent 
to give the reader a good understanding of how volatility affects positions and how it 
can be used to construct trades with positive expected rates of return. 

===== PDF PAGE 801 =====
· GHAR:f ER :8'7 . . -
How Volatility Affects 
Popular Strategies 
The previous chapter addressed the calculation or interpretation of implied volatili­
ty, and how to relate it to historic volatility. Another, related topic that is important is 
how implied volatility affects a specific option strategy. Simplistically, one might think 
that the effect of a change in implied volatility on an option position would be a sim­
ple matter to discern; but in reality, most traders don't have a complete grasp of the 
ways that volatility affects option positions. In some cases, especially option spreads 
or more complex positions, one may not have an intuitive "picture" of how his posi­
tion is going to be affected by a change in implied volatility. In this chapter, we'll 
attempt a relatively thorough review of how implied volatility changes affect most of 
the popular option strategies. 
There are ways to use computer analysis to "draw" a picture of this volatiiity 
effect, of course, and that will be discussed momentarily. But an option strategist 
should have some idea of the general changes that a position will undergo if implied 
volatility changes. Before getting into the individual strategies, it is important that 
one understands some of the basics of the effect of volatility on an option's price. 
VEGA 
Technically speaking, the term that one uses to quantify the impact of volatility 
changes on the price of an option is called the vega of the option. In this chapter, the 
references will be to vega, but the emphasis here is on practicality, so the descriptions 
749 

===== PDF PAGE 802 =====
750 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
of how volatility affects option positions will be in plain English as well as in the more 
mathematical realm of vega. Having said that, let's define vega so that it is understood 
for later use in the chapter. 
Simply stated, vega is the amount by which an option's price changes when 
volatility changes by one percentage point. 
Example: XYZ is selling at 50, and the July 50 call is trading at 7.25. Assume that 
there is no dividend, that short-term interest rates are 5%, and that July expiration is 
exactly three months away. With this information, one can determine that the implied 
volatility of the July 50 call is 70%. That's a fairly high number, so one can surmise 
that XYZ is a volatile stock. What would the option price be if implied volatility were 
rise to 71 %? Using a model, one can determine that the July 50 call would theoreti­
cally be worth 7.35 if that happened. Hence, the vega of this option is 0.10 (to two 
decimal places). That is, the option price increased by 10 cents, from 7.25 to 7.35, 
when volatility rose by one percentage point. (Note that "percentage point" here 
means a full point increase in volatility, from 70% to 71 %.) 
What if implied volatility had decreased instead? Once again, one can use the 
model to determine the change in the option price. In this case, using an implied 
volatility of 69% and keeping everything else the same, the option would then theo­
retically be worth 7.15- again, a 0.10 change in price (this time, a decrease in price). 
This example points out an interesting and important aspect of how volatility 
affects a call option: If implied volatility increases, the price of the option will 
increase, and if implied volatility decreases, the price of the option will decrease. 
Thus, there is a direct relationship between an option's price and its implied volatili-
ty. 
Mathematically speaking, vega is the partial derivative of the Black-Scholes 
model (or whatever model you're using to price options) with respect to volatility. In 
the above example, the vega of the July 50 call, with XYZ at 50, can be computed to 
be 0.098 - very near the value of 0.10 that one arrived at by inspection. 
Vega also has a direct relationship with the price of a put. That is, as implied 
volatility rises, the price of a put will rise as well. 
Example: Using the same criteria as in the last example, suppose that XYZ is trading 
at 50, that July is three months away, that short-term interest rates are 5%, and that 
there is no dividend. In that case, the following theoretical put and call prices would 
apply at the stated implied volatilities: 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 37 | PDF PAGES 803-840 =====

===== PDF PAGE 803 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 751 
Stock Price July 50 call July 50 put Implied Volatility Put's Vega 
50 7.15 6.54 69% 0.10 
7.25 6.64 70% 0.10 
7.35 6.74 71% 0.10 
Thus, the put's vega is 0.10, too - the same as the call's vega was. 
In fact, it can be stated that a call and a put with the same terms have the same 
vega. To prove this, one need only refer to the arbitrage equation for a conversion. If 
the call increases in price and everything else remains equal - interest rates, stock 
price, and striking price - then the put price must increase by the same amount. A 
change in implied volatility will cause such a change in the call price, and a similar 
change in the put price. Hence, the vega of the put and the call must be the same. 
It is also important to know how the vega changes as other factors change, par­
ticularly as the stock price changes, or as time changes. The following examples con­
tain several tables that illustrate the behavior of vega in a typically fluctuating envi­
ronment. 
Example: In this case, let the stock price fluctuate while holding interest rate (5% ), 
implied volatility (70%), time (3 months), dividends (0), and the strike price (50) con­
stant. See Table 37-1. 
In these cases, vega drops when the stock price does, too, but it remains fairly 
constant if the stock rises. It is interesting to note, though, that in the real world, 
when the underlying drops in price especially if it does so quickly, in a panic mode 
- implied volatility can increase dramatically. Such an increase may be of great ben­
efit to a call holder, serving to mitigate his losses, perhaps. This concept will be dis­
cussed further later in this chapter. 
TABLE 37-1 
Implied Volatility Theoretical 
Stock Price July 50 Call Price Coll Price Vega 
30 70% 0.47 0.028 
40 2.62 0.073 
50 7.25 0.098 
60 14.07 0.092 
70 22.35 0.091 

===== PDF PAGE 804 =====
752 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
The above example assumed that the stock was making instantaneous changes 
in price. In reality, of course, time would be passing as well, and that affects the vega 
too. Table 37-2 shows how the vega changes when time changes, all other factors 
being equal. 
Example: In this example, the following items are held fixed: stock price (50), strike 
price (50), implied volatility (70%), risk-free interest rate (5%), and dividend\(0). But 
now, we let time fluctuate. 
Table 37-2 clearly shows that the passage of time results not only in a decreas­
ing call price, but in a decreasing vega as well. This makes sense, of course, since one 
cannot expect an increase in implied volatility to have much of an effect on a very 
short-term option - certainly not to the extent that it would affect a LEAPS option. 
Some readers might be wondering how changes in implied volatility itself would 
affect the vega. This might be called the "vega of the vega," although I've never actu­
ally heard it referred to in that manner. The next table explores that concept. 
Example: Again, some factors will be kept constant - the stock price (50), the time 
to July expiration (3 months), the risk-free interest rate (5%), and the dividend (0). 
Table 37-3 allows implied volatility to fluctuate and shows what the theoretical price 
of a July 50 call would be, as well as its vega, at those volatilities. 
Thus, Table 37-3 shows that vega is surprisingly constant over a wide range of 
implied volatilities. That's the real reason why no one bothers with "vega of the vega." 
Vega begins to decline only if implied volatility gets exceedingly high, and implied 
volatilities of that magnitude are relatively rare. 
One can also compute the distance a stock would need to rise in order to over­
come a decrease in volatility. Consider Figure 37-1, which shows the theoretical price 
TABLE 37-2 
Implied Time Theoretical 
Stock Price Volatility Remaining Call Price Vega 
50 70% One year 14.60 0.182 
Six months 10.32 0.135 
Three months 7.25 0.098 
Two months 5.87 0.080 
One month 4.16 0.058 
Two weeks 2.87 0.039 
One week 1.96 0.028 
One day 0.73 0.010 

===== PDF PAGE 805 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affeds Popular Strategies 
TABLE 37-3 
Implied 
Stock Price Volatility 
50 10% 
30% 
50% 
70% 
100% 
150% 
200% 
Theoretical 
Coll Price 
1.34 
3.31 
5.28 
7.25 
10.16 
14.90 
19.41 
753 
Vega 
0.097 
0.099 
0.099 
0.098 
0.096 
0.093 
0.088 
of a 6-month call option with differing implied volatilities. Suppose one buys an 
option that currently has implied volatility of 170% (the top curve on the graph). 
Later, investor perceptions of volatility diminish, and the option is trading with an 
implied volatility of 140%. That means that the option is now "residing" on the sec­
ond curve from the top of the list. Judging from the general distance between those 
two curves, the option has probably lost between 5 and 8 points of value due to the 
drop in implied volatility. 
Here's another way to think about it. Again, suppose one buys an at-the-money 
option (stock price = 100) when its implied volatility is 170%. That option value is 
marked as point A on the graph in Figure 37-1. Later, the option's implied volatility 
drops to 140%. How much does the stock have to rise in order to overcome the loss 
of implied volatility? The horizontal line from point A to point B shows that the 
option value is the same on each line. Then, dropping a vertical line from B down to 
point C, we see that point C is at a stock price of about 109. Thus, the stock would 
have to rise 9 points just to keep the option value constant, if implied volatility drops 
from 170% to 140%. 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY AND DELTA 
Figure 37-1 shows another rather unusual effect: When implied volatility gets very 
high, the delta of the option doesn't change much. Simplistically, the delta of an 
option measures how much the option changes in price when the stock moves one 
point. Mathematically, the delta is the first partial derivative of the option model with 
respect to stock price. Geometrically, that means that the delta of an option is the 
slope of a line drawn tangent to the curve in the preceding chart. 

===== PDF PAGE 806 =====
754 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 37-1. 
Theoretical option prices at differing implied 
volatilities (6-month calls). 
80 
70 
Q) 60 
(.) 
·;::: 
Cl.. 50 
C: 
0 
·a 40 
0 
30 
20 
10 
Stock Price 
60 80 100 C 120 140 
_JY.._ 
170% 
140% 
110% 
80% 
50% 
20% 
The bottom line in Figure 37-1 (where implied volatility= 20%) has a distinct 
curvature to it when the stock price is between about 80 and 120. Thus the delta 
ranges from a fairly low number (when the stock is near 80) to a rather high number 
(when the stock is near 120). Now look at the top line on the chart, where implied 
volatility= 170%. It's almost a straight line from the lower left to the upper right! The 
slope of a straight line is constant. This tells us that the delta (which is the slope) 
barely changes for such an expensive option - whether the stock is trading at 60 or 
it's trading at 150! That fact alone is usually surprising to many. 
In addition, the value of this delta can be measured: It's 0. 70 or higher from a 
stock price of 80 all the way up to 150. Among other things, this means that an out~ 
of-the-money option that has extremely high implied volatility has a fairly high delta 
- and can be expected to mirror stock price movements more closely than one might 
think, were he not privy to the delta. 
Figure 37-2 follows through on this concept, showing how the delta of an option 
varies with implied volatility. From this chart, it is clear how much the delta of an 
option varies when the implied volatility is 20%, as compared to how little it varies 
when implied volatility is extremely high. 
That data is interesting enough by itself, but it becomes even more thought-pro­
voking when one considers that a change in the implied volatility of his option (vega) 
also can mean a significant change in the delta of the option. In one sense, it explains 
why, in the first chart (Figure 37-1), the stock could rise 9 points and yet the option 
holder made nothing, because implied volatility declined from 170% to 140%. 

===== PDF PAGE 807 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 
EFFECTS ON NEUTRALITY 
755 
A popular concept that uses delta is the "delta-neutral" spread a spread whose prof­
itability is supposedly ambivalent to market movement, at least for short time frames 
and limited stock price changes. Anything that significantly affects the delta of an 
option can affect this neutrality, thus causing a delta-neutral position to become 
unbalanced ( or, more likely, causing one's intuition to be wrong regarding what con­
stitutes a delta-neutral spread in the first place). 
Let's use a familiar strategy, the straddle purchase, as an example. Simplistically, 
when one buys a straddle, he merely buys a put and a call with the same terms and 
doesn't get any fancier than that. However, it may be the case that, due to the deltas 
of the options involved, that approach is biased to the upside, and a neutral straddle 
position should be established instead. 
Example: Suppose that XYZ is trading at 100, that the options have an implied 
volatility of 40%, and that one is considering buying a six-month straddle with a strik­
ing price of 100. The following data summarize the situation, including the option 
prices and the deltas: 
XYZ Common: l 00; Implied Volatility: 40% 
Option 
XYZ October l 00 call 
XYZ October l 00 put 
FIGURE 37-2. 
Price 
12.00 
10.00 
Delta 
0.60 
-0.40 
Value of delta of a 6-month option at differing implied volatilities. 
90 
80 
70 
.!!l 
ai 60 
Cl 
C: 50 ,g 
8° 40 
30 
20 
10 
60 80 100 
Stock Price 
120 140 

===== PDF PAGE 808 =====
756 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Notice that the stock price is equal to the strike price (100). However, the deltas 
are not at all equal. In fact, the delta of the call is 1.5 times that of the put (in absolute 
value). One must buy three puts and two calls in order to have a delta-neutral posi­
tion. 
Most experienced option traders know that the delta of an at-the-money call is 
somewhat higher than that of an at-the-money put. Consequently, they often esti­
mate, without checking, that buying three puts and two calls produces a delta-neu­
tral "straddle buy." However, consider a similar situation, but with a much higher 
implied volatility- 110%, say. 
AAA Common: 100; Implied Volatility: 110% 
Option 
AAA October 100 call 
AAA October 1 00 put 
Price 
31.00 
28.00 
Delta 
0.67 
-0.33 
The delta-neutral ratio here is two-to-one (67 divided by 33), not three-to-two 
as in the earlier case - even though both stock prices are 100 and both sets of options 
have six months remaining. This is a big difference in the delta-neutral ratio, espe­
cially if one is trading a large quantity of options. This shows how different levels of 
implied volatility can alter one's perception of what is a neutral position. It also points 
out that one can't necessarily rely on his intuition; it is always best to check with a 
model. 
Carrying this thought a step further, one must be mindful of a change in implied 
volatility if he wants to keep his position delta-neutral. If the implied volatility of AAA 
options should drop significantly, the 2-to-l ratio will no longer be neutral, even if the 
stock is still trading at 100. Hence, a trader wishing to remain delta-neutral must 
monitor not only changes in stock price, but changes in implied volatility as well. For­
more complex strategies, one will also find the delta-neutral ratio changing due to a 
change in implied volatility. 
The preceding examples summarize the major variables that might affect the 
vega and also show how vega affects things other than itself, such as delta and, there­
fore, delta neutrality. By the way, the vega of the underlying is zero; an increase in 
implied volatility does not affect the price of the underlying instrument at all, in the­
ory. In reality, if options get very expensive (i.e., implied volatility spikes up), that 
usually brings traders into a stock and so the stock price will change. But that's not a 
mathematical relationship, just a market cause-and-effect relationship. 

===== PDF PAGE 809 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 
POSITION VEGA 
757 
As can be done with delta or with any other of the partial derivatives of the model, 
one can compute a position vega - the vega of an entire position. The position vega 
is determined by multiplying the individual option vegas by the quantity of options 
bought or sold. The "position vega" is merely the quantity of options held, times the 
vega, times the shares per options ( which is normally 100). 
Example: Using a simple call spread as an example, assume the following prices 
exist: 
Security Position Vega Position Vego 
XYZ Stock No position 
XYZ July 50 call Long 3 calls 0.098 +0.294 
XYZ July 70 call Short 5 calls 0.076 -0.380 
Net Position Vega: -0.086 
This concept is very important to a volatility trader, for it tells him if he has con­
structed a position that is going to behave in the manner he expects. For example, 
suppose that one identifies expensive options, and he figures that implied volatility 
will decrease, eventually becoming more in line with its historical norms. Then he 
would want to construct a position with a negative position vega. A negative position 
vega indicates that the position will profit if implied volatility decreases. Conversely, 
a buyer of volatility - one who identifies some underpriced situation - would want to 
construct a position with a positive position vega, for such a position will profit if 
implied volatility rises. In either case, other factors such as delta, time to expiration, 
and so forth will have an effect on the position's actual dollar profit, but the concept 
of position vega is still important to a volatility trader. It does no good to identify 
cheap options, for example, and then establish some strange spread with a negative 
position vega. Such a construct would be at odds with one's intended purpose - in 
this case, buying cheap options. 
OUTRIGHT OPTION PURCHASES AND SALES 
Let us now begin to investigate the affects of implied volatility on various strategies, 
beginning with the simplest strategy of all - the outright option purchase. It was 
already shown that implied volatility affects the price of an individual call or put in a 

===== PDF PAGE 810 =====
758 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
direct manner. That is, an increase in implied volatility will cause the option price to 
rise, while a decrease in volatility will cause a decline in the option price. That piece 
of information is the most important one of all, for it imparts what an option trader 
needs to know: An explosion in implied volatility is a boon to an option owner, but 
can be a devastating detriment to an option seller, especially a naked option seller. 
A couple of examples might demonstrate more clearly just how powerful the 
effect of implied volatility is, even when there isn't much time remaining in the life 
of an option. One should understand the notion that an increase in implied volatility 
can overcome days, even weeks, of time decay. This first example attempts to quan­
tify that statement somewhat. 
Example: Suppose that XYZ is trading at 100 and one is interested in analyzing a 3-
month call with striking price of 100. Furthermore, suppose that implied volatility is 
currently at 20%. Given these assumptions, the Black-Scholes model tells us that the 
call would be trading at a price of 4.64. 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
3 months 
20% 
4.64 
Now, suppose that a month passes. If implied volatility remained the same 
(20% ), the call would lose nearly a point of value due to time decay. However, how 
much would implied volatility have had to increase to completely counteract the 
effect of that time decay? That is, after a month has passed, what implied volatility 
will yield a call price of 4.64? lt turns out to be just under 26%. 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
2 months 
25.9% 
4.64 
What would happen after another month passes? There is, of course, some 
implied volatility at which the call would still be worth 4.64, but is it so high as to be 
unreasonable? Actually, it turns out that if implied volatility increases to about 38%, 
the call will still be worth 4.64, even with only one month of life remaining: 

===== PDF PAGE 811 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
1 month 
38.1% 
4.64 
759 
So, if implied volatility increases from 20% to 26% over the first month, then 
this call option would still be trading at the same price - 4.64. That's not an unusual 
increase in implied volatility; increases of that magnitude, 20% to 26%, happen all 
the time. For it to then increase from 26% to 38% over the next month is probably 
less likely, but it is certainly not out of the question. There have been many times in 
the past when just such an increase has been possible - during any of the August, 
September, or October bear markets or mini-crashes, for example. Also, such an 
increase in implied volatility might occur if there were takeover rumors in this stock, 
or if the entire market became more volatile, as was the case in the latter half of the 
1990s. 
Perhaps this example was distorted by the fact that an implied volatility of 20% 
is a fairly low number to begin with. What would a similar example look like if one 
started out with a much higher implied volatility - say, 80%? 
Example: Making the same assumptions as in the previous example, but now setting 
the implied volatility to a much higher level of 80%, the Black-Scholes model now 
says that the call would be worth a price of 16.45: 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
3 months 
80% 
16.45 
Again, one must ask the question: "If a month passes, what implied volatility 
would be necessary for the Black-Scholes model to yield a price of 16.45?" In this 
case, it turns out to be an implied volatility of just over 99%. 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
2 months 
99.4% 
16.45 

===== PDF PAGE 812 =====
758 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
direct manner. That is, an increase in implied volatility will cause the option price to 
rise, while a decrease in volatility will cause a decline in the option price. That piece 
of information is the most important one of all, for it imparts what an option trader 
needs to know: An explosion in implied volatility is a boon to an option owner, but 
can be a devastating detriment to an option seller, especially a naked option seller. 
A couple of examples might demonstrate more clearly just how powerful the 
effect of implied volatility is, even when there isn't much time remaining in the life 
of an option. One should understand the notion that an increase in implied volatility 
can overcome days, even weeks, of time decay. This first example attempts to quan­
tify that statement somewhat. 
Example: Suppose that XYZ is trading at 100 and one is interested in analyzing a 3-
month call with striking price of 100. Furthermore, suppose that implied volatility is 
currently at 20%. Given these assumptions, the Black-Scholes model tells us that the 
call would be trading at a price of 4.64. 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
3 months 
20% 
4.64 
Now, suppose that a month passes. If implied volatility remained the same 
(20% ), the call would lose nearly a point of value due to time decay. However, how 
much would implied volatility have had to increase to completely counteract the 
effect of that time decay? That is, after a month has passed, what implied volatility 
will yield a call price of 4.64? It turns out to be just under 26%. 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
2 months 
25.9% 
4.64 
What would happen after another month passes? There is, of course, some 
implied volatility at which the call would still be worth 4.64, but is it so high as to be 
unreasonable? Actually, it turns out that if implied volatility increases to about 38%, 
the call will still be worth 4.64, even with only one month of life remaining: 

===== PDF PAGE 813 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
1 month 
38.1% 
4.64 
759 
So, if implied volatility increases from 20% to 26% over the first month, then 
this call option would still be trading at the same price 4.64. That's not an unusual 
increase in implied volatility; increases of that magnitude, 20% to 26%, happen all 
the time. For it to then increase from 26% to 38% over the next month is probably 
less likely, but it is certainly not out of the question. There have been many times in 
the past when just such an increase has been possible - during any of the August, 
September, or October bear markets or mini-crashes, for example. Also, such an 
increase in implied volatility might occur if there were takeover rumors in this stock, 
or if the entire market became more volatile, as was the case in the latter half of the 
1990s. 
Perhaps this example was distorted by the fact that an implied volatility of 20% 
is a fairly low number to begin with. What would a similar example look like if one 
started out with a much higher implied volatility say, 80%? 
Example: Making the same assumptions as in the previous example, but now setting 
the implied volatility to a much higher level of 80%, the Black-Scholes model now 
says that the call would be worth a price of 16.45: 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
3 months 
80% 
16.45 
Again, one must ask the question: "If a month passes, what implied volatility 
would be necessary for the Black-Scholes model to yield a price of 16.45?" In this 
case, it turns out to be an implied volatility of just over 99%. 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
2 months 
99.4% 
16.45 

===== PDF PAGE 814 =====
760 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Finally, to be able to completely compare this example with the previous one, it 
is necessary to see what implied volatility would have to rise to in order to offset the 
effect of yet another month's time decay. It turns out to be over 140%: 
Stock Price: 
Strike Price: 
Time Remaining: 
Implied Volatility: 
Theoretical Call Value: 
100 
100 
1 month 
140.9% 
16.45 
Table 37-4 summarizes the results of these examples, showing the levels to 
which implied volatility would have to rise to maintain the call's value as time passes. 
Are the volatility increases in the latter example less likely to occur than the 
ones in the former example? Probably yes - certainly the last one, in which implied 
volatility would have to increase from 80% to nearly 141 % in order to maintain the 
call's value. However, in another sense, it may seem more reasonable: Note that the 
increase in volatility from 20% to 26% is a 30% increase. That is, 20% times 1.30 
equals 26%. That's what's required to maintain the call's value for the lower volatility 
over the first month - an increase in the magnitude of implied volatility of 30%. At 
the higher volatility, though, an increase in magnitude of only about 25% is required 
(from 80% to 99%). Thus, in those terms, the two appear on more equal footing. 
What makes the top line of Table 37-4 appear more likely than the bottom line 
is merely the fact that an experienced option trader knows that many stocks have 
implied volatilities that can fluctuate in the 20% to 40% range quite easily. However, 
there are far fewer stocks that have implied volatilities in the higher range. In fact, 
until the Internet stocks got hot in the latter portion of the 1990s, the only ones with 
volatilities like those were very low-priced, extremely volatile stocks. Hence one's 
experience factor is lower with such high implied volatility stocks, but it doesn't mean 
that the volatility fluctuations appearing in Table 37-4 are impossible. 
If the reader has access to a software program containing the Black-Scholes 
model, he can experiment with other situations to see how powerful the effect of 
implied volatility is. For example, without going into as much detail, if one takes the 
case of a 12-month option whose initial implied volatility is 20%, all it takes to main-
TABLE 37-4 
Initial Implied 
Volatility 
20% 
80% 
Volatility Leveled Required to Maintain Call Value ... 
... After One Month ... After Two Months 
26% 
99% 
38% 
141% 

===== PDF PAGE 815 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 761 
tain the call's value over a 6-month time period is an increase in implied volatility to 
27%. Taken from the viewpoint of the option seller, this is perhaps most enlighten­
ing: If you sell a one-year (LEAPS) option and six months pass, during which time 
implied volatility increases from 20% to 27% - certainly quite possible -you will have 
made nothing! The call will still be selling for the same price, assuming the stock is 
still selling for the same price. 
Finally, it was mentioned earlier that implied volatility often explodes during a 
market crash. In fact, one could determine just how much of an increase in implied 
volatility would be necessary in a market crash in order to maintain the call's value. 
This is similar to the first example in this section, but now the stock price will be 
allowed to decrease as well. Table 37-5, then, shows what implied volatility would be 
required to maintain the call's initial value (a price of 4.64), when the stock price falls. 
The other factors remain the same: time remaining (3 months), striking price (100), 
and interest rate (5% ). Again, this table shows instantaneous price changes. In real 
life, a slightly higher implied volatility would be necessary, because each market crash 
could take a day or two. 
Thus, from Table 37-5, one could say that even if the underlying stock dropped 
20 points (which is 20% in this case) in one day, yet implied volatility exploded from 
20% to 67% at the same time, the call's value would be unchanged! Could such an 
outrageous thing happen? It has: In the Crash of '87, the market plummeted 22% in 
one day, while the Volatility Index ($VIX) theoretically rose from 36% to 150% in one 
day. In fact, call buyers of some $OEX options actually broke even or made a little 
money due to the explosion in implied volatility, despite the fact that the worst mar­
ket crash in history had occurred. 
If nothing else, these examples should impart to the reader how important it is 
to be aware of implied volatility at the time an option position is established. If you 
are buying options, and you buy them when implied volatility is "low," you stand to 
TABLE 37-5 
Stock Price 
100 
95 
90 
85 
80 
75 
70 
Implied Volatility Necessary for Call to Maintain Value 
20% (the initial parameters) 
33% 
44% 
55% 
67% 
78% 
89% 

===== PDF PAGE 816 =====
762 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
benefit if implied volatility merely returns to "normal" levels while you hold the posi­
tion. Of course, having the underlying increase in price is also important. 
Conversely, an option seller should be keenly aware of implied volatility when 
the option is initially sold - perhaps even more so than the buyer of an option. This 
pertains equally well to naked option writers and to covered option writers. If implied 
volatility is "too low" when the option writing position is established, then an increase 
(or worse, an explosion) in implied volatility will be very detrimental to the position, 
completely overcoming the effects of time decay. Hence, an option writer should not 
just sell options because he thinks he is collecting time decay each day that passes. 
That may be true, but an increase in implied volatility can completely domin.ate what 
little time decay might exist, especially for a longer-term option. 
In a similar manner, a decrease in implied volatility can be just as important. 
Thus, if the call buyer purchases options that are "too costly," ones in which implied 
volatility is "too high," then he could lose money even if the underlying makes a mod­
est move in his favor. 
In the next chapters, the topic of just how an option buyer or seller should 
measure implied volatility to determine what is "too low" or "too high" will be dis­
cussed. For now, suffice it to grasp the general concept that a change in implied 
volatility can have substantial effects on an option's price far greater effects than the 
passage of time can have. 
In fact, all of this calls into question just exactly what time value premium is. 
That part of an option's value that is not intrinsic value is really affected much more 
by volatility than it is by time decay, yet it carries the term "time value premium." 
TIME VALUE PREMIUM IS A MISNOMER 
Many (perhaps novice) option traders seem to think of time as the main antagonist to 
an option buyer. However, when one really thinks about it, he should realize that the 
portion of an option that is not intrinsic value is really much more related to stock 
price movement and/or volatility than anything else, at least in the short term. For 
this reason, it might be beneficial to more closely analyze just what the "excess value" 
portion of an option represents and why a buyer should not primarily think of it as 
time value premium. 
An option's price is composed of two parts: (1) intrinsic value, which is the "real" 
part of the option's value - the distance by which the option is in-the-money, and (2) 
"excess value" - often called time value premium. There are actually five factors that 
affect the "excess value" portion of an option. Eventually, time will dominate them 

===== PDF PAGE 817 =====
Chapter 37: How Volah'lity Affects Popular Strategies 763 
all, but the longer the life of the option, the more the other factors influence the 
"excess value." 
The five factors influencing excess value are: 
1. stock price movements, 
2. changes in implied volatility, 
3. the passage of time, 
4. changes in the dividend (if any exist), and 
5. changes in interest rates. 
Each is stated in terms of a movement or change; that is, these are not static 
things. In fact, to measure them one uses the "greeks": delta, vega, theta, (there is no 
"greek" for dividend change), and rho. Typically, the effect of a change in dividend or 
a change in interest rate is small (although a large dividend change or an interest rate 
change on a very long-term option can produce visible changes in the prices of 
options). 
If everything remains static, then time decay will eventually wipe out all of the 
excess value of an option. That's why it's called time value premium. But things don't 
ever remain static, and on a daily basis, time decay is small, so it is the remaining two 
factors that are most important. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 82 in late November. The January 80 call is trading at 8. 
Thus, the intrinsic value is 2 (82 minus 80) and the excess value is 6 (8 minus 2). If 
the stock is still at 82 at January expiration, the option will of course only be worth 2, 
and one will say that the 6 points of excess value that was lost was due to time decay. 
But on that day in late November, the other factors are much more dominant. 
On this particular day, the implied volatility of this option is just over 50%. One 
can determine that the call's greeks are: 
Delta: 0.60 
Vega: 0.13 
Theta: -0.06 
This means, for example, that time decay is only 6 cents per day. It would 
increase as time went by, but even with a day or so to go, theta would not increase 
above about 20 cents unless volatility increased or the stock moved closer to the 
strike price. 
From the above figures, one can see - and this should be intuitively appealing that 
the biggest factor influencing the price of the option is stock price movement (delta). 

===== PDF PAGE 818 =====
764 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatiRty 
It's a little unfair to say that, because it's conceivable (although unlikely) that volatil­
ity could jump by a large enough margin to become a greater factor than delta for 
one day's move in the option. Furthermore, since this option is composed mostly of 
excess value, these more dominant forces influence the excess value more than time 
decay does. 
There is a direct relationship between vega and excess value. That is, if implied 
volatility increases, the excess value portion of the option will increase and, if implied 
volatility decreases, so will excess value. 
The relationship between delta and excess value is not so straightforward. The 
farther the stock moves away from the strike, the more this will have the effect of 
shrinking the excess value. If the call is in-the-money (as in the above example), then 
an increase in stock price will result in a decrease of excess value. That is, a deeply in­
the-money option is composed primarily of intrinsic value, while excess value is quite 
small. However, when the call is out-of-the-money, the effect is just the opposite: 
Then, an increase in call price will result in an increase in excess value, because the 
stock price increase is bringing the stock closer to the option's striking price. 
For some readers, the following may help to conceptualize this concept. The 
part of the delta that addresses excess value is this: 
Out-of-the-money call: 100% of the delta affects the excess value. 
In-the-money call: "1.00 minus delta" affects the excess value. (So, if a call is very 
deeply in-the-money and has a delta of 0.95, then the delta only has 1.00 - 0.95, 
or 0.05, room to increase. Hence it has little effect on what small amount of 
excess value remains in this deeply in-the-money call.) 
These relationships are not static, of course. Suppose, for example, that in the 
same situation of the stock trading at 82 and the January 80 call trading at 8, there is 
only week remaining until expiration! Then the implied volatility would be 155% 
(high, but not unheard of in volatile times). The greeks would bear a significantly dif­
ferent relationship to each other in this case, though: 
Delta: 0.59 
Vega: 0.044 
Theta: -0 .5 1 
This very short-term option has about the same delta as its counterpart in the previ­
ous example (the delta of an at-the-money option is generally slightly above 0.50). 
Meanwhile, vega has shrunk. The effect of a change in volatility on such a short-term 
option is actually about a third of what it was in the previous example. However, time 
decay in this example is huge, amounting to half a point per day in this option. 

===== PDF PAGE 819 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 765 
So now one has the idea of how the excess value is affected by the "big three" 
of stock price movement, change in implied volatility, and passage of time. How can 
one use this to his advantage? First of all, one can see that an option's excess value 
may be due much more to the potential volatility of the underlying stock, and there­
fore to the option's implied volatility, than to time. 
As a result of the above information regarding excess value, one shouldn't think 
that he can easily go around selling what appear to be options with a lot of excess 
value and then expect time to bring in the profits for him. In fact, there may be a lot 
of volatility both actual and implied - keeping that excess value nearly intact for a 
fairly long period of time. In fact, in the coming chapters on volatility estimation, it 
will be shown that option buyers have a much better chance of success than conven­
tional wisdom has maintained. 
VOLATILITY AND THE PUT OPTION 
While it is obvious that an increase in implied volatility ½ill increase the price of a put 
option, much as was shown for a call option in. the preceding discussion, there are 
certain differences between a put and a call, so a little review of the put option itself 
may be useful. A put option tends to lose its premium fairly quickly as it becomes an 
in-the-money option. This is due to the realities of conversion arbitrage. In a con­
version arbitrage, an arbitrageur or market-maker buys stock and buys the put, while 
selling the call. If he carries the position to expiration, he will have to pay carrying 
costs on the debit incurred to establish the position. Furthermore, he would earn any 
dividends that might be paid while he holds the position. This information was pre­
sented in a slightly different form in the chapter on arbitrage, but it is recounted 
here: 
In a perfect world, all option prices would be so accurate that there would be 
no profit available from a conversion. That is, the following equation (1) would apply: 
(1) Call price+ Strike price - Stock price - Put price+ Dividend- Carrying cost= 0 
where carrying cost = strike price/ (1 + r)t 
t = time to expiration 
r = interest rate 
Now, it is also known that the time value premium of a put is the amount by which 
its value exceeds intrinsic value. The intrinsic value of an in-the-money put option is 
merely the difference between the strike price and the stock price. Hence, one can 
write the following equation (2) for the time value premium (TVP) of an in-the­
money put option: 

===== PDF PAGE 820 =====
766 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
(2) Put TVP = Put price - Strike price + Stock price 
The arbitrage equation, (1), can be rewritten as: 
(3) Put price - Strike price+ Stock price= Call price+ Dividends - Carrying cost 
and substituting equation (2) for the terms in equation (3), one arrives at: 
( 4) Put TVP = Call price + Dividends - Carrying cost 
In other words, the time value premium of an in-the-money put is the same as the 
(out-of-the-money) call price, plus any dividends to be ea med until expiration, less 
any carrying costs over that same time period. 
Assuming that the dividend is small or zero (as it is for most stocks), one can see 
that an in-the-money put would lose its time value premium whenever carrying costs 
exceed the value of the out-of-the-money call. Since these carrying costs can be rel­
atively large ( the carrying cost is the interest being paid on the entire debit of the 
position - and that debit is approximately equal to the strike price), they can quickly 
dominate the price of an out-of-the-money call. Hence, the time value premium of 
an in-the-money put disappears rather quickly. 
This is important information for put option buyers, because they must under­
stand that a put won't appreciate in value as much as one might expect, even when 
the stock drops, since the put loses its time value premium quickly. It's even more 
important information for put sellers: A short put is at risk of assignment as soon as 
there is no time value premium left in the put. Thus, a put can be assigned well in 
advance of expiration even a LEAPS put! 
Now, returning to the main topic of how implied volatility affects a position, one 
can ask himself how an increase or decrease in implied volatility would affect equa­
tion ( 4) above. If implied volatility increases, the call price would increase, and if the 
increase were great enough, might impart some time value premium to the put. 
Hence, an increase in implied volatility also may increase the price of a put, but if the 
put is too far in-the-nwney, a modest increase in implied volatility still won't budge 
the put. That is, an increase in implied volatility would increase the value of the call, 
but until it increases enough to be greater than the carrying costs, an in-the-money 
put will remain at parity, and thus a short put would still remain at risk of assignment. 
STRADDLE OR STRANGLE BUYING AND SELLING 
Since owning a straddle involves owning both a put and a call with the same terms, 
it is fairly evident that an increase in implied volatility will be very beneficial for a 
straddle buyer. A sort of double benefit occurs if implied volatility rises, for it will 

===== PDF PAGE 821 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 767 
positively affect both the put and the call in a long straddle. Thus, if a straddle buyer 
is careful to buy straddles in situations in which implied volatility is "low," he can 
make money in one of two ways. Either (1) the underlying price makes a move great 
enough in magnitude to exceed the initial cost of the straddle, or (2) implied volatil­
ity increases quickly enough to overcome the deleterious effects of time decay. 
Conversely, a straddle seller risks just the opposite - potentially devastating loss­
es if implied volatility should increase dramatically. However, the straddle seller can 
register gains faster than just the rate of time decay would indicate if implied volatil­
ity decreases. Thus, it is very important when selling options - and this applies to cov­
ered options as well as to naked ones - to sell only when implied volatility is "high." 
A strangle is the same as a straddle, except that the call and put have different 
striking prices. Typically, the call strike price is higher than the put strike price. 
Naked option sellers often prefer selling strangles in which the options are well out­
of-the-money, so that there is less chance of them having any intrinsic value when 
they expire. Strangles behave much like straddles do with respect to changes in 
implied volatility. 
The concepts of straddle ownership will be discussed in much more detail in the 
following chapters. Moreover, the general concept of option buying versus option 
selling will receive a great deal of attention. 
CALL BULL SPREADS 
In this section, the bull spread strategy will be examined to see how it is affected by 
changes in implied volatility. Let's look at a call bull spread and see how implied 
volatility changes might affect the price of the spread if all else remains equal. Make 
the following assumptions: 
Assumption Set 1 : 
Stock Price: 1 00 
Time to Expiration: 4 months 
Position: long Call Struck at 90 
Short Call Struck at 110 
Ask yourself this simple question: If the stock remains unchanged at 100, and implied 
volatility increases dramatically, will the price of the 90-110 call bull spread grow or 
shrink? Answer before reading on. 
The truth is that, if implied volatility increases, the price of the spread will 
shrink. I would suspect that this comes as something of a surprise to a good number 
of readers. Table 37-6 contains some examples, generated from a Black-Scholes 

===== PDF PAGE 822 =====
768 
TABLE 37-6 
Implied 
Volatility 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
Stock Price = I 00 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatHity 
90-110 Call 
Bull Spread 
(Theoretical Value) 
10.54 
9.97 
9.54 
9.18 
8.87 
8.58 
8.30 
model, using the assumptions stated above, the most important of which is that the 
stock is at 100 in all cases in this table. 
One should be aware that it would probably be difficult to actually trade the 
spread at the theoretical value, due to the bid-asked spread in the options. 
Nevertheless, the impact of implied volatility is clear. 
One can quantify the amount by which an option position will change for each 
percentage point of increase in implied volatility. Recall that this measure is called 
the vega of the option or option position. In a call bull spread, one would subtract the 
vega of the call that is sold from that of the call that is bought in order to arrive at the 
position vega of the call bull spread. Table 37-7 is a reprint of Table 37-6, but now 
including the vega. 
Since these vegas are all negative, they indicate that the spread will shrink in 
value if implied volatility rises and that the spread will expand in value if implied 
TABLE 37-7 
90-110 Call 
Implied Bull Spread Position 
Volatility (Theoretical Value) Vega 
20% 10.54 -0.67 
30% 9.97 -0.48 
40% 9.54 -0.38 
50% 9.18 -0.33 
60% 8.87 -0.30 
70% 8.58 -0.28 
80% 8.30 -0.26 

===== PDF PAGE 823 =====
Chapter 37: How VolatHity Afleds Popular Strategies 769 
volatility decreases. Again, these statements may seem contrary to what one would 
expect from a bullish call position. 
Of course, it's highly unlikely that implied volatility would change much in the 
course of just one day while the stock price remained unchanged. So, to get a bet­
ter handle on what to expect, one really to needs to look at what might happen at 
some future time (say a couple of weeks hence) at various stock prices. The graph 
in Figure 37-3 begins the investigation of these more complex scenarios. 
The profit curve shown in Figure 37-3 makes certain assumptions: (1) The bull 
spread assumes the details in Assumption Set 1, above; (2) the spread was bought 
with an implied volatility of 20% and remained at that level when the profit picture 
above was drawn; and (3) 30 days have passed since the spread was bought. Under 
these assumptions, the profit graph shows that the bull spread conforms quite well to 
what one would expect; that is, the shape of this curve is pretty much like that of a 
bull spread at expiration, although if you look closely you'll see that it doesn't widen 
out to nearly its maximum gain or loss potential until the stock is well above llO or 
below 90 the strike prices used in the spread. 
Now observe what happens if one keeps all the other assumptions the same, 
except one. In this case, assume implied volatility was 80% at purchase and remains 
at 80% one month later. The comparison is shown in Figure 37-4. The 80% curve is 
overlaid on top of the 20% curve shown earlier. The contrast is quite startling. 
Instead of looking like a bull spread, the profit curve that uses 80% implied volatili-
FIGURE 37-3. 
Bull spread profit picture in 30 days, at 20% IV. 
1000 
500 
<J) 
<J) 
0 0 ...J 
?i:: 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 
e a. 
"' -500 
Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 824 =====
770 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 37-4. 
Bull spread profit picture in 30 days. 
1000 
500 
iv=80% 
(/) 
(/) 
0 
0 -' :;:, 
70 801 90 e 
~ 
a. 
fl'> 
-500 
130 140 
iv= 20% 
-1000 Stock 
ty is a rather flat thing, sloping only slightly upward - and exhibiting far less risk and 
reward potential than its lower implied volatility counterpart. This points out anoth­
er important fact: For volatile stocks, one cannot expect a 4-rrwnth bull spread to 
expand or contract much during the first rrwnth of life, even if the stock makes a sub­
stantial rrwve. Longer-term spreads have even less movement. 
As a corollary, note that if implied volatility shrinks while the stock rises, the 
profit outlook will improve. Graphically, using Figure 37-4, if one's profit picture 
moves from the 80% curve to the 20% curve on the right-hand side of the chart, that 
is a positive development. Of course, if the stock drops and the implied volatility 
drops too, then one's losses would be worse - witness the left-hand side of the graph 
in Figure 37-4. 
A graph could be drawn that would incorporate other implied volatilities, but 
that would be overkill. The profit graphs of the other spreads from Tables 37-6 or 
37-7 would lie between the two curves shown in Figure 37-4. 
If this discussion had looked at bull spreads as put credit spreads instead of call 
debit spreads, perhaps these conclusions would not have seemed so unusual. 
Experienced option traders already understand much of what has been shown here, 
but less experienced traders may find this information to be different from what they 
expected. 
Some general facts can be drawn about the bull spread strategy. Perhaps the 
most important one is that, if used on a volatile stock, you won't get much expansion 
in the spread even if the stock makes a nice move upward in your favor. In fact, for 

===== PDF PAGE 825 =====
Cbapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 771 
high implied volatility situations, the bull spread won't expand out to its maximum 
price until expiration draws nigh. That can be frustrating and disappointing. 
Often, the bull spread is established because the option trader feels the options 
are "too expensive" and thus the spread strategy is a way to cut down on the total 
debit invested. However, the ultimate penalty paid is great. Consider the fact that, 
if the stock rose from 100 to 130 in 30 days, any reasonable four-month call pur­
chase (i.e., with a strike initially near the current stock price) would make a nice 
profit, while the bull spread barely ekes out a 5-point gain. To wit, the graph in 
Figure 37-5 compares the purchase of the at-the-money call with a striking price of 
100 and the 90-110 call bull spread, both having implied volatility of 80%. Quite 
clearly, the call purchase dominates to a great extent on an upward move. Of course, 
the call purchase does worse on the downside, but since these are bullish strategies, 
one would have to assume that the trader had a positive outlook for the stock when 
the position was established. Hence, what happens on the downside is not primary 
in his thinking. 
The bull spread and the call purchase have opposite position vegas, too. That is, 
a rise in implied volatility will help the call purchase but will harm the bull spread 
( and vice versa). Thus, the call purchase and the bull spread are not very similar posi­
tions at all. 
If one wants to use the bull spread to effectively reduce the cost of buying an 
expensive at-the-money option, then at least make sure the striking prices are quite 
FIGURE 37-5. 
Call buy versus bull spread in 30 days; IV = 80%. 
Cl) 
~ 
2500 
2000 
1500 
1000 
e 500 
Cl. 
-500 
-1000 
Outright Call Buy 
Bull Spread 
---
140 
Stock 

===== PDF PAGE 826 =====
772 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
wide apart. That will allow for a reasonable amount of price appreciation in the bull 
spread if the underlying rises in price. Also, one might want to consider establishing 
the bull spread with striking prices that are both out-of-the-money. Then, if the stock 
rallies strongly, a greater percentage gain can be had by the spreader. Still, though, 
the facts described above cannot be overcome; they can only possibly be mitigated 
by such actions. 
A FAMILIAR SCENARIO? 
Often, one may be deluded into thinking that the two positions are more similar than 
they are. For example, one does some sort of analysis - it does not matter if it's fun­
damental or technical - and comes to a conclusion that the stock ( or futures contract 
or index) is ready for a bullish move. Furthermore, he wants to use options to imple­
ment his strategy. But, upon inspecting the actual market prices, he finds that the 
options seem rather expensive. So, he thinks, "Why not use a bull spread instead? It 
costs less and it's bullish, too." 
Fairly quickly, the underlying moves higher - a good prediction by the trader, 
and a timely one as well. If the move is a violent one, especially in the futures mar­
ket, implied volatility might increase as well. If you had bought calls, you'd be a happy 
camper. But if you bought the bull spread, you are not only highly disappointed, but 
you are now facing the prospect of having to hold the spread for several more weeks 
(perhaps months) before your spread widens out to anything even approaching the 
maximum profit potential. 
Sound familiar? Every option trader has probably done himself in with this line 
of thinking at one time or another. At least, now you know the reason why: High or 
increasing implied volatility is not a friend of the bull spread, while it is a friendly ally 
of the outright call purchase. Somewhat surprisingly, many option traders don't real­
ize the difference between these two strategies, which they probably consider to be 
somewhat similar in nature. 
So, be careful when using bull spreads. If you really think a call option is too 
expensive and want to reduce its cost, ti:y this strategy: Buy the call and simultane­
ously sell a credit put spread (bull spread) using slightly out-of-the-money puts. This 
strategy reduces the call's net cost and maintains upside potential (although it 
increases downside risk, but at least it is still a fixed risk). 
Example: With XYZ at 100, a trader is bullish and wants to buy the July 100 calls, 
which expire in two months. However, upon inspection, he finds that they are trad­
ing at 10 - an implied volatility of 59%. He knows that, historically, the implied 
volatility of this stock's options range from approximately 40% to 60%, so these are 

===== PDF PAGE 827 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 773 
very expensive options. If he buys them now and implied volatility returns to its 
median range near 50%, he will suffer from the decrease in implied volatility. 
As a possible remedy, he considers selling an out-of-the-money put credit 
spread at the same time that he buys the calls. The credit from this spread will act as 
a means of reducing the net cost of the calls. If he's right and the stock goes up, all 
will be well. However, the introduction of the put spread into the mix has introduced 
some additional downside risk. 
Suppose the following prices exist: 
XYZ: 100 
July 100 call: 10 (as stated above) 
July 90 put: 5 
July 80 put: 2 
The entire bullish position would now consist of the following: 
Buy 1 July 100 call at 1 0 
Buy 1 July 80 put at 2 
Sell 1 July 90 put at 5 
Net expenditure: 7 point debit (plus commission) 
Figure 37-6 shows the profitability, at expiration, of both the outright call pur­
chase and the bullish position constructed above. 
FIGURE 37-6. 
Profitability at expiration. 
2000 
Bullish Spread // 
/ 
1000 
"' "' 0 ...J 
87 :!:: 
Outright Call Purchase 
e 0 
C. 70 80 90 
<Ft 100 /100 ,,....... ___ 
120 
-1000 
Stock 
-2000 

===== PDF PAGE 828 =====
774 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
First, one can see that the bullish spread position has a total risk of 17 points, if 
X'YZ is below 80 (the lower striking price of the put spread) at expiration. That, of 
course, is more than the 10-point cost of the July 100 call by itself, but if one is using 
a trading stop of any sort, he probably would not be at risk for the entire 17 points, 
since he wouldn't hold on while the stock fell all the way to 80 and below. Note also 
that the bullish spread position would have a loss of 10 points (the same as the call) 
at a price of 87 for the common at expiration. Hence, the combined position actual­
ly has less risk than the outright call purchase as long as XYZ is 87 or higher at expi­
ration. Since one is supposedly bullish initially when establishing this strategy, it 
seems likely that he would figure the stock would be 87 or higher at expiration. · 
Figure 37-7 offers another comparison, that of the two positions after 30 days 
have passed. Note that the spread position once again does better on the upside and 
worse on the downside. The crossover point between the two curves is at about a 
price of95. That is, ifXYZ is above 95 in 30 days, the bullish spread position will out­
perform the call buy. 
One final point should be made regarding the investment required. The out­
right call purchase requires an investment of $1,000 - the cost of the long call. The 
bullish spread position requires that $1,000, plus $700 for the spread (IO-point dif­
ference in the strikes, less the 3-point credit received for selling the spread). That's a 
total of $1,700, the risk of the bullish spread position. Hence, the rate of return might 
favor the outright call purchase, depending on how far the stock rallies. 
FIGURE 37-7. 
Results of the two positions in 30 days. 
Cl) 
_g 
:;::, 
e 
Cl.. 
~ 
1000 
-1000 
-2000-
Spread 
95 
110 
Stock 
/ 
Outright Call Purchase 
120 

===== PDF PAGE 829 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 775 
Overall, the bullish spread position is an attractive alternative to an outright call 
purchase, especially when the call is overpriced. The spread does risk a greater 
amount of money if the underlying stock should collapse heavily. Still, if one is truly 
bullish, and if one employs a reasonably tight downside stop on his entire position, 
this spread can perform better than the outright purchase of an overpriced call. 
VERTICAL PUT SPREADS 
Also of interest is the effect that implied volatility has on put spreads. One of the 
more popular strategies involving puts is the sale of a credit spread - a bull spread 
with puts. Assume that a stock is selling at 100, and one is going to sell a put with a 
110 strike and buy a put with a 90 strike. That is a put credit (bull) spread. Also 
assume that the options have four months of life remaining. (See Table 37-8.) 
One would not rationally sell this credit spread if implied volatility were as low 
as 20%, because at that low level of volatility, the in-the-money December llO put is 
trading for 10 dollars - parity - and thus would immediately be at risk of early 
assignment. But one can see that an increase in implied volatility increases the value 
of the spread. Now, if one had sold this spread to begin with, he would thus be los­
ing money when implied volatility increased. This was proven with call bull spreads, 
too: They lose money when implied volatility increases. Conversely, of course, the 
put credit spread makes money when implied volatility decreases. 
What happens after thirty days have passed? Figure 37-8 shows just two cases 
- implied volatility at 30% and implied volatility at 80%. One can surmise that other 
levels of implied volatility between 30% and 80% would have profit graphs that lie 
between the two shown in Figure 37-8. 
TABLE 37·8 
Implied 
Volatility 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
*Short option trading at parity 
90-110 
Put Bull Spread 
(Theoretical Value) 
9.15 er* 
9.70 er 
10.12 er 
10.46 er 
10.78 er 
11.05 er 
11.33 er 

===== PDF PAGE 830 =====
174 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
First, one can see that the bullish spread position has a total risk of 17 points, if 
XYZ is below 80 (the lower striking price of the put spread) at expiration. That, of 
course, is more than the 10-point cost of the July 100 call by itself, but if one is using 
a trading stop of any sort, he probably would not be at risk for the entire 17 points, 
since he wouldn't hold on while the stock fell all the way to 80 and below. Note also 
that the bullish spread position would have a loss of 10 points (the same as the call) 
at a price of 87 for the common at expiration. Hence, the combined position actual­
ly has less risk than the outright call purchase as long as XYZ is 87 or higher at expi­
ration. Since one is supposedly bullish initially when establishing this strategy, it 
seems likely that he would figure the stock would be 87 or higher at expiration. 
Figure 37-7 offers another comparison, that of the two positions after 30 days 
have passed. Note that the spread position once again does better on the upside and 
worse on the downside. The crossover point between the two curves is at about a 
price of 95. That is, ifXYZ is above 95 in 30 days, the bullish spread position will out­
perform the call buy. 
One final point should be made regarding the investment required. The out­
right call purchase requires an investment of $1,000 - the cost of the long call. The 
bullish spread position requires that $1,000, plus $700 for the spread (IO-point dif­
ference in the strikes, less the 3-point credit received for selling the spread). That's a 
total of $1,700, the risk of the bullish spread position. Hence, the rate of return might 
favor the outright call purchase, depending on how far the stock rallies. 
FIGURE 37-7. 
Results of the two positions in 30 days. 
1000 
en 
Ill 
0 
...J 
O 70 :;::, 
~ ... a. 
w 
-1000 
-2000-
80 
95 
Bullish Spread 
Stock 
Spread 
110 
/ 
1/ 
Outright Call Purchase 
120 

===== PDF PAGE 831 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 775 
Overall, the bullish spread position is an attractive alternative to an outright call 
purchase, especially when the call is overpriced. The spread does risk a greater 
amount of money if the underlying stock should collapse heavily. Still, if one is truly 
bullish, and if one employs a reasonably tight downside stop on his entire position, 
this spread can perform better than the outright purchase of an overpriced call. 
VERTICAL PUT SPREADS 
Also of interest is the effect that implied volatility has on put spreads. One of the 
more popular strategies involving puts is the sale of a credit spread - a bull spread 
with puts. Assume that a stock is selling at 100, and one is going to sell a put with a 
110 strike and buy a put with a 90 strike. That is a put credit (bull) spread. Also 
assume that the options have four months of life remaining. (See Table 37-8.) 
One would not rationally sell this credit spread if implied volatility were as low 
as 20%, because at that low level of volatility, the in-the-money December llO put is 
trading for 10 dollars - parity - and thus would immediately be at risk of early 
assignment. But one can see that an increase in implied volatility increases the value 
of the spread. Now, if one had sold this spread to begin with, he would thus be los­
ing money when implied volatility increased. This was proven with call bull spreads, 
too: They lose money when implied volatility increases. Conversely, of course, the 
put credit spread makes money when implied volatility decreases. 
What happens after thirty days have passed? Figure 37-8 shows just two cases 
- implied volatility at 30% and implied volatility at 80%. One can surmise that other 
levels of implied volatility between 30% and 80% would have profit graphs that lie 
between the two shown in Figure 37-8. 
TABLE 37-8 
Implied 
Volatility 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
*Short option trading at parity 
90-110 
Put Bull Spread 
(Theoretical Value) 
9.15 er* 
9.70 er 
10. 12 er 
10.46 er 
10.78 er 
11.05 er 
11.33 er 

===== PDF PAGE 832 =====
776 
FIGURE 37-8. 
Put credit (bull) spread profit in 30 days. 
1000 
500 
- 1000 _ _,±8± 
Assignment Risk Area 
IV=30% 
Stock 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
-~ 
IV= 30% 
130 140 
First, one can observe that a bull put spread does not widen out to anywhere 
near its maximum potential if implied volatility increases. The same thing was seen 
with the call bull spread in the previous section. But a put bull spreader is caught in 
another trap: If implied volatility falls and the stock falls too, the risk of early assign­
ment materializes quicky. Note the shaded area at the lower left of the graph, extend­
ing from a price of about 94 on down. After thirty days (so there would be three 
months life remaining at that point in time), if implied volatility is 30%, the 110 put 
(the short put) would be trading at parity for stock prices of 94 and below. Thus, it 
would be at risk of early assignment. If implied volatility were even lower, the puts 
would be at parity for much higher stock prices. 
Now, in and of itself, early assignment on an equity or futures put spread is not 
necessarily a terrible thing. There will be a request for additional margin (because 
the stock has to be paid for or the futures contract margined), but the risk is still the 
same in dollar terms. Of course, the request for extra margin could be backbreaking 
for a stock trader if he can't afford to fully pay for the stock, and the early assignment 
would probably incur additional commission costs, too. However, with cash-based 
index options there is a more serious increase in risk after an early assignment, 
because one is left with only the long side of the spread. If that option happens to 
have substantial value, then there is considerable risk if the underlying should quick­
ly move higher. In fact, by the time one unwinds the spread, he might actually end 
up losing more than his original limited risk amount - all due to the early assignment. 
(This could happen if the underlying first plunges in price, placing both options 

===== PDF PAGE 833 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 777 
deeply in-the-money, after which one gets assigned on the short put option, followed 
by the underlying then dramatically rising in price.) 
The lesson to be learned is this: If one is considering using bull spreads in which 
at least one of the options is at- or in-the-rrwney, then a call bull spread is a superior 
choice over a put bull spread. Early assignment is not really a consideration for most 
call spreads. 
In both cases, however, a more serious problem exists, and that is that the 
spread does not widen out much even when the stock makes a nice bullish move. 
Thus, once again it is actually better to buy a call option in most cases than to use the 
bull spread, because profits are larger and an increase in implied volatility is a favor­
able thing for an outright call buyer. 
Note that these effects are similar, but much less pronounced, for out-of-the­
money put credit spreads. Still, it should be noted that an increase in implied volatil­
ity will harm an out-of-the-money put credit spread, too. Hence, if the underlying 
goes into a rapid fall (crash, plunge), then implied volatility usually increases quickly 
and dramatically. So an out-of-the-money credit spreader is hit with the double 
whammy of expanding implied volatility and the fact that the underlying is fast 
approaching the strike price of his options, . thereby expanding the price of the 
spread. 
PUT BEAR SPREADS 
What about the put spread in a bearish situation? In a vertical put spread one buys 
the put with the higher strike and sells the put with the lower strike to construct a 
simple put bear spread. Actually, a sudden increase in implied volatility is of help to 
the bear put spread. That is, the spread will widen out slightly. To verify this, look at 
Table 37-8 again, only now imagine that one is buying the spread for a debit. Note 
that the smallest debit is at the lower implied volatility- 9.15 debit with IV at 30%. 
If implied volatility were to instantaneously jump to 80%, the spread would widen 
out to 11.33 debit. A very quick profit could be had. So there's a difference right away 
between a debit call bull spread (which loses money when implied volatility sudden­
ly increases) and a debit put bear spread. 
Unfortunately, the other major drawback - that the spread doesn't widen out 
much if the underlying makes a favorable move - is still true. Figure 37-9 shows a 
bear put spread, 30 days hence, for two different implied volatilities. Once again, the 
lower-volatility spread widens out more quickly, because both options tend to go to 
parity in that case. In fact, one can see on the graph that there is early assignment 
risk in the low-volatility case, below a price of about 77 on the stock. That is not a 

===== PDF PAGE 834 =====
778 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 37-9. 
Bear put spread profit in 30 days. 
1000 IV= 30% 
Assignment 
Risk 
Area 
(/) 
(/) 
0 
...J 
~ 0 
e 70 80 110 120 130 140 
a. 
ff7 
IV= 80% 
-1000 
'~ 
Stock 
problem, though, since the spread would have widened to its maximum potential in 
that case and could just be removed when the risk of early assignment materialized. 
When implied volatility remains high, though, the spread doesn't widen out 
much, even when the stock drops a lot after 30 days. Since it is common for implied 
volatility to rise (even skyrocket) when the underlying drops quickly, the put bear 
spread probably won't widen out much. That may not be a psychologically pleasing 
strategy, because one won't make the level of profits that he had hoped to when the 
underlying fell quickly. 
Once again, it seems that the outright purchase of an option is probably superi­
or to a spread. In these cases, it is true with respect to puts, much as it was with call 
options. Spreading often unnecessarily complicates a trader's outlook. 
CALENDAR SPREADS 
In the earlier chapter on calendar spreads, it was mentioned that an increase in 
implied volatility will cause a calendar spread to widen out. Both options will become 
more expensive, of course, since the increase in implied volatility affects both of 
them, but the absolute price change will be greatest in the long-term option. 
Therefore, the calendar spread will widen. This may seem somewhat counterintu­
itive, especially where highly volatile stocks are concerned, so some examples may 
prove useful. 

===== PDF PAGE 835 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 779 
Example: Suppose that XYZ is trading at 100, and one is interested in a calendar 
spread in which an August (5-month) call is bought and a May (2-month) call is sold. 
For the purpose of this example, it will be assumed that these are both at-the-money 
options. First, the vegas of the two options will be examined, assuming that implied 
volatility is 40%: 
Stock: 100 
Implied Volatility: 
40% Option 
Sell May 100 call 
Buy August 1 00 call 
Theoretical Price 
6.91 
11.22 
Vega 
0.162 
0.251 
In theory, this spread should be worth 4.31 - the difference in the theoretical 
values. Perhaps more important, it has volatility exposure of 0.089 - the difference 
between the vega of the long call and that of the short call. Since vega is positive, this 
means that an increase in implied volatility will be beneficial to the spread. In other 
words, one can expect the spread to widen if implied volatility rises, and can expect 
the spread to shrink if implied volatility declines. 
The following table can also be constructed, showing the theoretical value of 
the spread at various levels of implied volatility. This table makes the assumption that 
very little time has passed ( only one week) before the implied volatility changes take 
place. It also assumes that the stock is still at 100. 
Stock Price: 100 
One week ofter the spread hos been established: 
Implied Volatility Theoretical Spread Value 
20% 2.58 
30% 3.52 
40% 4.46 
50% 5.40 
60% 6.33 
80% 8.16 
100% 12.92 
From the above data, it is quite obvious that implied volatility levels have a huge 
effect on the value of a calendar spread. The actual initial contribution of time decay 
is rather small in comparison. For example, note that if volatility remains unchanged 
at 40%, then the spread will have widened only slightly - to 4.46 from 4.31 - after 
the passage of one week's time. That is small in comparison to the changes dictated 
by volatility expansion or contraction. 

===== PDF PAGE 836 =====
780 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
A common mistake that calendar spreaders make is to think that such a spread 
looks overly attractive on a very volatile stock. Consider the same stock as above, still 
trading at 100, but for some reason implied volatility has skyrocketed to 80% (per­
haps a takeover rumor is present). 
Stock: JOO 
Implied Volatility: 80% 
Coll 
May 100 call 
June 100 call 
Theoretical Value 
12.55 
16.81 
On the surface, this seems like a very attractive spread. There are two months 
of life remaining in the May options (and three months in the Junes) and the spread 
is trading at 4.36. However, both options are completely composed of time value 
premium, and most certainly the June 100 call would be worth far more than 4.36 
when the May expires, if the stock is still near 100. The fact that many traders miss 
when they think of the calendar spread this way is that the June call will only be 
worth "far more than 4.36" if implied volatility holds up. If implied volatility for this 
stock is normally something on the order of 40%, say, then it is probably not reason­
able to expect that the 80% level will hold up. Just for comparison, note that if the 
stock is at 100 at May expiration - the maximum profit potential for such a calendar 
spread - the June 100 call, with implied volatility now at 40%, and with one month 
of life remaining, would be worth only 4. 77. Thus the spread would only have made 
a profit of a few cents (4.36 to 4.77), and if the underlying stock were farther from 
the strike price at expiration, there would probably be a loss rather than a profit. 
The point to be remembered is that a calendar spread is a "long volatility" play 
(and a reverse calendar spread is just the opposite). Evaluate the position's risk with 
an eye to what might happen to implied volatility, and not just to where the stock 
price might go or how much time decay there might be in the position. 
RATIO SPREADS AND BACKSPREADS 
The previous descriptions in this chapter describe fairly fully and accurately what 
the effect of volatility changes are. More complicated strategies are usually nothing 
more than combinations of the strategies presented earlier, so it is easy to discern 
the effect that changes in implied volatility would have; just combine the effects on 
the simpler strategies. For example, a ratio call write is really just the equivalent of 
a straddle sale - a strategy whose volatility ramifications are fairly simple to under­
stand. 
Ratio spreads, on the other hand, might not be as intuitive to interpret, but they 
are fairly simple nonetheless. A call ratio spread is really just the combination of some 

===== PDF PAGE 837 =====
Chapter 37: How Volatility Affects Popular Strategies 781 
call bull spreads and some naked call options. For example, a call ratio spread might 
consist of buying an XYZ July 100 call and selling two XYZ July 120 calls. If one were 
to break it down into its components, this spread is really long one XYZ July 100-120 
call bull spread, plus an additional naked July 120 call. 
We already know that an increase in implied volatility is very detrimental to a 
naked call option. In addition, it was shown earlier than an increase in implied volatil­
ity actually harms the value of an at-the-money call bull spread. So, for a ratio call 
spread, both components are harmed by an increase in implied volatility. Conversely, 
a decrease in implied volatility would be beneficial to a ratio spread, but where naked 
options are concerned, one should be more mindful of his risk than of this reward. 
It was also shown previously that a call bull spread does not widen out much if 
the underlying stock makes a quick upward move. The spread won't widen out to its 
maximum profit potential until expiration draws nigh or the stock is well above the 
upper strike in the spread. This scenario also does not bode well for the ratio call 
spread. Suppose that the underlying stock suddenly jumps upward and implied 
volatility increases at the same time. That combination is seen quite frequently, espe­
cially if the stock were previously "dull" or if there is some sort of active corporate 
(takeover) rumor. The call ratio spread will fare miserably under these conditions, 
because the increase in stock price certainly harms the naked call position and the 
bull spread is not widening out much to compensate for it. In addition, the increase 
in implied volatility is working against both components. 
The same sort of thing happens with put ratio spreads. They are really the com­
bination of a put bear spread plus some additional naked put options. If the under­
lying falls in price, while implied volatility increases - a very common occurrence in 
all markets then the put ratio spread will fare poorly. In fact, implied volatility 
sometimes explodes if the underlying falls very rapidly (crashes), so the ratio put 
spreader should clearly assess his risk in this light. 
In summary, a trader utilizing ratio spread strategies should clearly understand 
and attempt to analyze the risks of an increase in implied volatility. This includes not 
only assessing the vega risk of the spread, but also using a probability calculator with 
some inflated volatility estimates to see just what the chances are of the spread get­
ting into real trouble. 
BACKSPREADS 
A call backspread is merely the opposite of a call ratio spread. Thus, any of the earli­
er commentary about how an increase in implied volatility is detrimental to a ratio 
spread can be reversed when discussing the backspread. An increase in implied 
volatility will be beneficial to a backspread strategy, while a decrease in implied 

===== PDF PAGE 838 =====
782 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
volatility will be slightly harmful to the spread. However, since risk is limited in a 
backspread, such a decrease in implied volatility would not have catastrophic conse­
quences unless one had overcommitted his funds to one position. 
SUMMARY 
In general, one can always determine the exposure of his position to volatility by com­
puting the vega of this position. However, it is also useful for a strategist to have some 
general feeling for how implied volatility will affect his positions and strategies. Thus, 
this chapter was designed to point out the most common effects that changes .in 
implied volatility will have on the basic types of option strategies. Once one has a 
feeling for his exposure to volatility, he can then assess whether an adverse volatility 
movement is likely. For example, if an increase in implied volatility would be harm­
ful, and the strategist sees that current levels of implied volatility are quite low in 
comparison to historical norms, then perhaps he should remove or adjust the posi­
tion. 
Volatility and the price of the underlying are the two major components 
affecting profitability for most option positions. Time decay is only most pertinent 
as expiration approaches. Yet, many traders concentrate greatly on potential price 
movements of the underlying, often while ignoring what changes in implied volatil­
ity could do. That is a mistake, for the most knowledgeable option traders plan for 
volatility risk at all times. Understanding and handling that risk can have a positive 
effect on an option trader's profits. 

===== PDF PAGE 839 =====
The Distribution of 
Stock Prices 
Much of the work that has been done in statistics and related areas regarding the 
stock market has made the assumption that stock prices are distributed normally, or 
more specifically, lognonnally. In actual practice, this is usually an incorrect assump­
tion. For the option strategist, this means that some of the things one might believe 
about certain option strategies having an advantage over certain other option strate­
gies might be incorrect. In this chapter, a number of facts concerning stock price dis­
tribution will be brought to light, including how it might affect the option strategist. 
MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT VOLATILITY 
Statistics are used to estimate stock price movement (and futures and indices as well) 
in many areas of financial analysis. Many authors have written extensively about the 
use of probabilities to aid in choosing viable option strategies. Stock mutual fund 
managers often use volatility estimates to help them determine how risky their port­
folios are. The uses are myriad. Unfortunately, almost all of these applications are 
wrong! Perhaps wrong is too strong a word, but almost all estimates of stock price 
movement are overly conservative. This can be very dangerous if one is using such 
estimates for the purposes of, say, writing naked options or engaging in some other 
such strategy in which volatile stock price movement is undesirable. 
As a review for those not familiar with mathematical distributions, the lognor­
mal distribution is what's commonly used to describe stock prices because its shape 
is intuitively similar to the way stocks behave - they can't go below zero, they can rise 
to infinity, and most of the time they don't go much of anywhere. On top of that, the 
distribution's shape is based on the historical volatility of the underlying instrument. 
In a lognormal distribution (and normal distribution, too), stocks remain within 3 
standard deviations of their current price 99. 7 4% of the time. A standard deviation 
783 

===== PDF PAGE 840 =====
784 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
(sigma) is a statistical measure whose absolute distance grows larger with time, and 
it is something that can be easily calculated for any individual stock or futures con­
tract, using historical prices. 
There are great differences between the way stocks really behave and the 
assumptions that many mathematical models make about the way stocks theoretical­
ly behave. The problem lies in assuming that normal or lognormal distribution pre­
dicts stock price movements. Such an assumption does not allow for the occasional 
wild days that many stocks, some futures, and the relatively rare index undergo. The 
normal distribution pretty much says that a stock can't rise or fall by more than 3 stan­
dard deviations. In fact, according to math, the probability of something that behaves 
according to the normal distribution ( the "classic" bell curve is a normal distribution) 
moving three standard deviations is 0.0013 (or just a little more than one tenth of one 
percent). So, if there are 2,500 optionable stocks, say, then one would expect maybe 
3 of them to move three standard deviations on any given day. 
However, in real market trading, there are routinely moves in stocks of more 
than 3 standard deviations - some as much as 5 standard deviations or more. 
Statistically (if the lognormal distribution were correct), one would only expect to see 
moves of that size maybe once in his lifetime, yet there are five or ten each day! 
Specifically, the normal distribution's probability of something being able to move 8 
standard deviations is 0.000000000000000629. This number is so small that one 
would expect to see only one such occurrence in the known life of the universe, if 
prices were truly distributed via the normal distribution. If the normal distribution 
were the correct format for stock prices, such a small probability would indicate that 
one would not see an 8-standard deviation move until billions of trading days had 
passed. However, one can find several such moves on nearly any trading day, and it 
is not necessary to use some low-priced, oddball stock that dropped from 1 to . 75 or 
some such nonsense as an example. 
If those numbers don't convince you that stocks aren't lognormally distributed, 
perhaps the following study will. Table 38-1 lists moves that occurred on Monday, 
April 5, 1999 - a day that was somewhat volatile (the Dow was up 174 points). 
There were many other substantial moves that day. In the list in Table 38-1, all 
three that fell in price were on earnings warnings, and the two that rose were just 
swept up in the that day's version of the Internet mania. All in all, 58 stocks had 
moves of greater than four standard deviations on that day! It was not any sort of spe­
cial day, although it did fall during earnings warnings season and in the midst of the 
Internet mania. But the fact that the market is somewhat volatile shouldn't justify all 
of these huge moves, if one still adheres to the belief that lognormal is the correct 
distribution. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 39 | PDF PAGES 870-905 =====

===== PDF PAGE 870 =====
CHAPTER 39 
Volatility Trading Techniques 
The previous three chapters laid the foundation for volatility trading. In this chapter, 
the actual application of the technique will be described. It should be understood 
that volatility trading is both an art and a science. It's a science to the extent that one 
must be rigorous about determining historical volatility or implied volatility, calculat­
ing probabilities, and so forth. However, given the vagaries of those measurements 
that were described in some detail in the previous chapters, volatility trading is also 
something of an art. Just as two fundamental analysts with the same information 
regarding earnings, sales projection, and so on might have two different opinions 
about a stock's fortunes, so also can two volatility traders disagree about the potential 
for movement in a stock. 
However, volatility traders do agree on the approach. It is based on comparing 
today's implied volatility with what one expects volatility to do in the future. As noted 
previously, one's expectations for volatility might be based on volatility charts, pat­
terns of historical volatility and implied volatility, or something as complicated as a 
GAR CH forecasting model. None of them guarantees success. However, we do know 
that volatility tends to trade in a range in the long run. Therefore, the approach that 
traders agree upon is this: If implied volatility is "low," buy it. If it's "high," sell it with 
caution. So simple: Buy low, sell high (not necessarily in that order). The theory 
behind volatility trading is that it's easier to buy low and sell high (or at least to deter­
mine what's "low" and "high") when one is speaking about volatility, than it is to do 
the same thing when one is talking about stock prices. 
Most of the time, implied volatility will not be significantly high or low on any 
particular stock, futures contract, or index. Therefore, the volatility trader will have 
little interest in most stocks on any given day. This is especially true of the big-cap 
stocks, the ones whose options are most heavily traded. There are so many traders 
812 

===== PDF PAGE 871 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 813 
watching the situation for those stocks that they will rarely let volatility get to the 
extremes that one would consider "too high" or "too low." Yet, with the large num­
ber of optionable stocks, futures, and indices that exist, there are always some that 
are out of line, and that's where the independent volatility trader will concentrate 
his efforts. 
Once a volatility extreme has been uncovered, there are different methods of 
trading it. Some traders - market-makers and short-term traders - are just looking 
for very fleeting trades, and expect volatility to fall back into line quickly after an 
aberrant move. Others prefer more of a position traders' approach: attempting to 
determine volatility extremes that are so far out of line with accepted norms that it 
will probably take some time to move back into line. Obviously, the trader's own sit­
uation will dictate, to a certain extent, which strategy he pursues. Things such as 
commission rates, capital requirements, and risk tolerance will determine whether 
one is more of a short-term trader or a position trader. The techniques to be 
described in this chapter apply to both methods, although the emphasis will be on 
position trading. 
TWO WAYS VOLATILITY PREDICTIONS CAN BE WRONG 
When traders determine the implied volatility of the options on any particular under­
lying instrument, they may generally be correct in their predictions; that is, implied 
volatility will actually be a fairly good estimate of forthcoming volatility. However, 
when they're wrong, they can actually be wrong in two ways: either in the outright 
prediction of volatility or in the path of their volatility predictions. Let's discuss both. 
When they're wrong about the absolute level of volatility, that merely means that 
implied volatility is either "too low" or "too high." In retrospect, one could only make 
that assessment, of course, after having seen what actual volatility turned out to be 
over the life of the option. The second way they could be wrong is by making the 
implied volatility on some of the options on a particular underlying instrument much 
cheaper or more expensive than other options on that same underlying instrument. 
This is called a volatility skew and it is usually an incorrect prediction about the way 
the underlying will perform during the life of the options. 
The rest of this chapter will be divided into two main parts, then. The first part 
will deal with volatility from the viewpoint of the absolute level of implied volatility 
being "wrong" (which we'll call "trading the volatility prediction"), and the second 
part will deal with trading the volatility skew. 

===== PDF PAGE 872 =====
814 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
TRADING THE VOLATILITY PREDICTION 
The volatility trader must have some way of determining when implied volatility is 
sufficiently out of line that it warrants a trade. Then he must decide what trade to 
establish. Furthermore, as with any strategy- especially option strategies - follow-up 
action is important too. We will not be introducing any new strategies, per se, in this 
chapter. Those strategies have already been laid out in the previous chapters of this 
book. However, we will briefly review important points about those strategies and 
their follow-up actions where it is appropriate. 
First, one must try to find situations in which implied volatility is out of line. 
That is not the end of the analysis, though. After that, one needs to do some proba­
bility work and needs to see how the underlying has behaved in the past. Other fine­
tuning measures are often useful, too. These will all be described in this chapter. 
DETERMINING WHEN VOLATILITY IS OUT OF LINE 
There is much disagreement among volatility traders regarding the best method to use 
for determining if implied volatility is "out ofline." Most favor comparing implied with 
historical volatility. However, it was shown two chapters ago that implied volatility is 
not necessarily a good predictor of historical volatility. Yet this approach cannot be dis­
carded; however it must be used judiciously. Another approach is to compare today's 
implied volatility with where it has been in the past. This concept relies heavily on the 
concept of the percentile of implied volatility. Finally, there is the approach of trying 
to "read" the charts of implied and historical volatility. This is actually something akin 
to what GARCH tries to do, but on a short-term horizon. So the approaches are: 
1. Compare implied volatility to its own past levels (percentile approach). 
2. Compare implied volatility to historical volatility. 
3. Interpret the chart of volatility. 
In addition, we will examine two lesser-used methods: comparing current levels of 
historical volatility to past measures of historical volatility, and finally, using only a 
probability calculator and trading the situation that has the best probabilities of 
success. 
THE PERCENTILE APPROACH 
In this author's opinion, there is much merit in the percentile approach. When one says 
that volatility tends to trade in a range, which is the basic premise behind volatility trad-

===== PDF PAGE 873 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 815 
ing, he is generally talking about implied volatility. Thus, it makes sense to know where 
implied volatility is within the range of the past readings of implied volatility. If volatil­
ity is low with respect to where it usually trades, then we can say the options are cheap. 
Conversely, if it's high with respect to those past values, then we can say the options are 
expensive. These conclusions do not draw on historical volatility. 
The percentile of implied volatility is generally used to describe just where the 
current implied volatility reading lies with respect to its past values. The "implied 
volatility" reading that is being used in this case is the composite reading - the one 
that takes into account all the options on an underlying instrument, weighting them 
by their distance in- or out-of-the-money (at-the-money gets more weight) and also 
weighting them by their trading volume. This technique has been referred to many 
times and was first described in Chapter 28 on mathematical applications. That com­
posite implied volatility reading can be stored in a database for each underlying 
instrument every day. Such databases are available for purchase from firms that spe­
cialize in option data. Also, snapshots of such data are available to members of 
www.optionstrategist.com. 
In general, most underlying instruments would have a composite implied 
volatility reading somewhere near the 50th percentile on any given day. However, it 
is not uncommon to see some underlyings with percentile readings near zero or 100% 
on a given day. These are the ones that would interest a volatility trader. Those with 
readings in the 10th percentile or less, say, would be considered "cheap"; those in the 
90th percentile or higher would be considered expensive. 
In reality, the percentile of implied volatility is going to be affected by what the 
broad market is doing. For example, during a severe market slide, implied volatilities 
will increase across the board. Then, one may find a large number of stocks whose 
options are in the 90th percentile or higher. Conversely, there have been other times 
when overall implied volatility has declined substantially: 1993, for example, and the 
summer of 2001, for another. At those times, we often find a great number of stocks 
whose options reside in the 10th percentile of implied volatility or lower. The point 
is that the distribution of percentile readings is a dynamic thing, not something stat­
ic like a lognormal distribution. Yes, perhaps over a long period of time and taking 
into account a great number of cases, we might find that the percentiles of implied 
volatility are normally distributed, but not on any given day. 
The trader has some discretion over this percentile calculation. Foremost, he 
must decide how many days of past history he wants to use in determining the per­
centiles. There are about 255 trading days in a year. So, if he wanted a two-year his­
tory, he would record the percentile of today's composite implied volatility with 
respect to the 510 daily readings over the past two years. This author typically uses 

===== PDF PAGE 874 =====
816 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
600 days of implied volatility history for the purpose of determining percentiles, but 
a case could be made for other lengths of time. The purpose is to use enough implied 
volatility history to give one a good perspective. Then, a reading of the 10th per­
centile or the 90th percentile will truly be significant and would therefore be a good 
starting point in determining whether the options are cheap or expensive. 
In addition to the actual percentile, the trader should also be aware of the width 
of the implied volatility distribution. This was discussed in an earlier chapter, but 
essentially the concept is this: If the first percentile is an implied volatility of 40% and 
the 100th percentile is an implied volatility of 45%, then that entire range is so nar­
row as to be meaningless in terms of whether one could classify the options as cheap 
or expensive. 
The advantage of buying options in a low percentile of implied volatility is to 
give oneself two ways to make money: one, via movement in the underlying (if a 
straddle were owned, for example), and two, by an increase in implied volatility. That 
is, if the options were to return to the 50th percentile of implied volatility, the volatil­
ity trader who has bought "cheap" options should expect to make money from that 
movement as well. That can only happen if the 50th percentile and the 10th per­
centile are sufficiently far apart to allow for an increase in the price of the option to 
be meaningful. Perhaps a good rule of thumb is this: If the option rises from the cur­
rent (low) percentile reading to the 50th percentile in a month, will the increase in 
implied volatility be equal to or greater than the time decay over that period? 
Alternatively stated, with all other things being equal, will the option be trading at 
the same or a greater price in a month, if implied volatility rises to the 50th percentile 
at the end of that time? If so, then the width of the range of implied volatilities is 
great enough to produce the desired results. 
The attractiveness to this method for determining if implied volatility is out of 
line is that the trader is "forced" to buy options that are cheap ( or to sell options that 
are expensive), on a relative basis. Even though historical volatility has not been taken 
into consideration, it will be later on when the probability calculators are brought to 
bear. There is no guarantee, of course, that implied volatility will move toward the 
50th percentile while the position is in place, but if it does, that will certainly be an 
aid to the position. 
In effect this method is measuring what the option trading public is "thinking" 
about volatility and comparing it with what they've thought in the past. Since the pub­
lic is wrong (about prices as well as volatility) at major turning points, it is valid to want 
to be long volatility when "everyone else" has pushed it down to depressed levels. The 
converse may not necessarily be true: that we would want to be short volatility when 
everyone else has pushed it up to extremely high levels. The caveat in that case is that 

===== PDF PAGE 875 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 817 
someone may have inside information that justifies expensive options. This is another 
reason why selling volatility can be difficult: You may be dealing with far less infor­
mation than those who are actually making the implied volatility high. 
COMPARING IMPLIED AND HISTORICAL VOLATILITY 
The most common way that traders determine which options are cheap or expensive 
is by comparing the current composite implied volatility with various historical 
volatility measures. However, just because this is the conventional wisdom does not 
necessarily mean that this method is the preferred one for determining which options 
are best for volatility trades. In this author's opinion, it is inferior to the percentile 
method (comparing implied to past measures of implied), but it does have its merits. 
The theory behind using this method is that it is a virtual certainty that implied and 
historical volatility will eventually converge with each other. So, if one establishes 
volatility trading positions when they are far apart, there is supposedly an advantage 
there. 
However, this argument has plenty of holes in it. First of all, there is no guar­
antee that the two will converge in a timely manner, for example, before the options 
in the trader's position can become profitable. Historical and implied volatility often 
remain fairly far apart for weeks at a time. 
Second, even if the convergence does occur, it doesn't necessarily mean one will 
make money. As an example, consider the case in which implied volatility is 40% and 
historical volatility is 60%. That's quite a difference, so you'd want to buy volatility. 
Furthermore, suppose the two do converge. Does that mean you'll make money? No, 
it does not. What if they converge and meet at 40%? Or, worse yet, at 30%? You'd 
most certainly lose in those cases as the stock slowed down while your options lost 
time value. 
Another problem with this method is that implied volatility is not necessarily 
low when it is bought, nor high when it is sold. Consider the example just cited. We 
merely knew that implied volatility was 40% and that historical volatility was 60%. We 
had no perspective on whether 40% was high, medium, or low. Thus, it is also nec­
essary to see what the percentile of implied volatility is. If it turns out that 40% is a 
relatively high reading for implied volatility, as determined by looking at where 
implied volatility has been over the past couple of years, then we would probably not 
want to buy volatility in this situation, even though implied and historical volatility 
have a large discrepancy between them. 
Many market-makers and floor traders use this approach. However, they are 
often looking for an option that is briefly mispriced, figuring that volatilities will 

===== PDF PAGE 876 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-

===== PDF PAGE 877 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-

===== PDF PAGE 878 =====
818 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quickly revert back to where they were. But for a position trader, the problems cited 
above can be troublesome. 
Having said that, if one looks to implement this method of trying to determine 
when options are out of line, something along the following lines should be imple­
mented. One should ensure that implied volatility is significantly different from all of 
the pertinent historical volatilities. For example, one might require that implied 
volatility is less than 80% of each of the 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day historical volatili­
ty calculations. In addition, the current percentile of implied volatility should be 
noted so that one has some relative basis for determining if all of the volatilities, his­
torical and implied, are very high or very low. One would not want to buy options if 
they were all in a very high percentile, nor sell them if they were all in a very low per­
centile. 
Often, a volatility chart showing both the implied and certain historical volatili­
ties will be a useful aid in making these decisions. One can not only quickly tell if the 
options are in a high or low percentile, but he may also be able to see what happened 
at similar times in the past when implied and historical volatility deviated substan­
tially. 
Finally, one needs some measure to ensure that, if convergence between 
implied and historical volatility does occur, he will be able to make money. So, for 
example, if one is buying a straddle, he might require that if implied rises to meet his­
torical (say, the lowest of the historicals) in a month, he will actually make money. 
One could use a different time frame, but be careful not to make it something unrea­
sonable. For example, if implied volatility is currently 40% and historical is 60%, it is 
highly unlikely that implied would rise to 60% in a day or two. Using this criterion 
also ensures that the absolute difference between implied and historical volatility is 
wide enough to allow for profits to be made. That is, if implied is 10% and historical 
is 13%, that's a difference of 30% in the two - ostensibly a "wide" divergence 
between implied and historical. However, if implied rises to meet historical, it will 
mean only an absolute increase of 3 percentage points in implied volatility - proba­
bly not enough to produce a profit, after costs, if any length of time passes. 
If all of these criteria are satisfied, then one has successfully found "mispriced" 
options using the implied versus historical method, and he can proceed to the next 
step in the volatility analysis: using the probability calculator. 
READING THE VOLATILITY CHART 
Another technique that traders use in order to determine if options are mispriced is 
to actually try to analyze the chart of volatility - typically implied volatility, but it 
could be historical. This might seem to be a subjective approach, except that it is real-

===== PDF PAGE 879 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 819 
ly not much different from the GARCH approach, which is considered to be highly 
advanced. When one views the volatility chart, he is not looking for chart patterns like 
technical analysts might do with stock charts: support, resistance, head-and-shoul­
ders, flags, pennants, and so on. Rather, he is merely looking for the trend of volatil­
ity to change. 
This is a valid approach in the use of many indicators, particularly sentiment 
indicators, that can go to extreme levels. By waiting for the trend to change, the user 
is not subjecting himself to buying into the midst of a downtrend in volatility, nor sell­
ing into the midst of a steep uptrend in volatility. 
Example: Suppose a volatility trader has determined that the current level of implied 
volatility for XYZ stock is in the 1st percentile of all past readings. Thus, the options 
are as cheap as they've ever been. Perhaps, though, the overall market is experienc­
ing a very dull period, or XYZ itself has been in a prolonged, tight trading range -
either of which might cause implied volatility to decline steadily and substantially. 
Having found these cheap options, he wants to buy volatility. However, he has no 
guarantee that implied volatility won't continue to decline, even though it is already 
as cheap as it's ever been. 
If he follows the technique of waiting for a reversal in the trend of implied 
volatility, then he would keep an eye on XYZ's implied volatility daily until it had at 
least a modest increase, something to indicate that option buyers have become more 
interested in XYZ's options. The chart in Figure 39-1 shows how this situation might 
look. 
There are a number of items marked on the chart, so it will be described in 
detail. There are two graphs in Figure 39-1: The top line is the implied volatility 
graph, while on the bottom is the stock price chart. The implied volatility chart shows 
that, near the first ofJune, it made new all-time lows near 28% (i.e., it was in the 0th 
percentile of implied volatility). Hence, one might have bought volatility at that 
point. However, it is obvious that implied volatility was in a steep downtrend at that 
time, so the volatility trader who reads the charts might have decided to wait for a 
pop in volatility before buying. This turned out to be a judicious decision, because 
the stock went nowhere for nearly another month and a half, all the while volatility 
was dropping. At the right of the chart, implied volatility has dropped to nearly 20%. 
The solid lines on the two graphs indicate the data that is known about the 
implied volatility and price history of XYZ. The dotted lines indicate a scenario that 
might unfold. If implied volatility were to jump ( and the stock price might jump, too), 
then one might think that the trend of implied volatility was no longer down, and he 
would then buy volatility. 

===== PDF PAGE 880 =====
820 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatHity 
The reason that this approach has merit is that one never knows how low volatil­
ity can go, and more important, how high it can get. It was mentioned that the same 
sort of approach works well for other sentiment indicators, the put-call ratio, in par­
ticular. During the bull market of the 1990s, the equity-only put-call ratio generally 
ranged between about 30 and 55. Thus, some traders became accustomed to buying 
the market when the put-call ratio reached numbers exceeding 50 (high put-call 
ratio numbers are bullish predictors for the market in general). However, when the 
bull market ended, or at least faltered, the put-call ratios zoomed to heights near 70 
or 75. Thus, those using a static approach (that is, "Buy at 50 or higher") were buried 
as they bought too early and had to suffer while the put-call ratios went to new all­
time highs. A trend reversal approach would have saved them. It is a more dynamic 
procedure, and thus one would have let the put-call ratio continue to rise until it 
peaked. Then the market could have been bought. 
This is exactly what reading the volatility chart is about. Rather than relying on 
past data to indicate where the absolute maxima and minima of movements might 
occur, one rather notes that the volatility data is at extreme levels ( 1st percentile or 
100th percentile) and then watches it until it reverses direction. This is especially 
useful for options sellers, because it avoids stepping into the vortex of massive option 
FIGURE 39-1. 
Chart of the trend of implied volatility. 
XYZ 
,J' 
········································ · ························ ....................... ··················· 50. 0 
... · ····················· 40. 0 
Implied Volatility I/vi A r 
···-····························· .. •·•······•·········-·············································-··vw•···················)·•······ 30. 0 
All-Time Volatility Low -
, .... , ..... , .. ··················,·······~················ 
t :t·•····•····· ...•. ':·LJJSL5~?. 
--;---··········•·: 
o, b ::r F f1 h j ::r 
34.000 
32.000 
30. 000 
28. 000 
26.000 
24.000 
22.000 
20. 000 

===== PDF PAGE 881 =====
Chapter 39: VolatiDty Trading Techniques 821 
buying, where the buyers perhaps have inside information about some forthcominf 
corporate event such as a takeover. True, the options might be very expensive ( 10ot 
percentile), but there is a reason they are, and those with the inside information know 
the reason, whereas the typical volatility trader might not. However, if the volatility 
trader merely waits for a downturn in implied volatility readings before selling these 
options, he will most likely avoid the majority of trouble because the options will 
probably not lose implied volatility until news comes out or until the buyers give up 
(perhaps figuring that the takeover rumor has died). 
Volatility buyers don't face the same problems with early entry that volatility 
sellers do, but still it makes sense to wait for the trend of volatility to increase (as in 
Figure 39-1) before trying to guess the bottom in volatility. Just as it is usually fool­
hardy to buy a stock that is in a severe downtrend, so it may be, too, with buying 
volatility. 
A less useful approach would be to apply the same techniques to historical 
volatility charts, for such charts say nothing about option prices. See the next section 
for expansion on these thoughts. 
COMPARING HISTORICAL VERSUS HISTORICAL 
The above paragraphs summarize the three major ways that traders attempt to find 
options that are out of line. Sometimes, another method is mentioned: comparing 
current levels of historical volatility with past levels of the same measure, historical 
volatility. This method will be described, but it is generally an inferior method 
because such a comparison doesn't tell us anything about the option prices. It would 
do little good, for example, to find that current historical volatility is in a very low per­
centile of historical volatilities, only to learn later that the options are expensive and 
that perhaps implied volatility is even higher than historical volatility. One would nor­
mally not want to buy options in that case, so the initial analysis of comparing histor­
ical to historical is a wasted effort. 
Comparing current levels of historical volatility with past measures of historical 
volatility is sort of a backward-looking approach, since historical volatility involves 
strictly the use of past stock prices. There is no consideration of implied volatility in 
this approach. Moreover, this method makes the tacit assumption that a stock's 
volatility characteristics do not change, that it will revert to some sort of "normal" past 
price behavior in terms of volatility. In reality, this is not true at all. Nearly every stock 
can be shown to have considerable changes in its historical volatility patterns over 
time. 

===== PDF PAGE 882 =====
822 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Consider the historical volatilities of one of the wilder stocks of the tech stock 
boom, Rambus (RMBS). Historical volatilities had ranged between 50% and ll0%, 
from the listing of RMBS stock, through February 2000. At that time, the stock aver­
aged a price of about $20 per share. 
Things changed mightily when RMBS stock began to rise at a tremendous rate 
in February 2000. At that time, the stock blasted to ll5, pulled back to 35, made a 
new high near 135, and then collapsed to a price near 20. Hence, the stock itself had 
completed a wild round-trip over the two-year period. See Figures 39-2 and 39-3 for 
the stock chart and the historical volatility chart of RMBS over the time period in 
question. 
As this happened, historical volatility skyrocketed. After February 2000, and 
well into 2001, historical volatility was well above 120%. Thus it is clear that the 
behavior patterns of Rambus changed greatly after February 2000. However, if one 
had been comparing historical volatilities at any time after that, he would have erro­
neously concluded that RMBS was about to slow down, that the historic volatilities 
were too high in comparison with where they'd been in the past. If this had led one 
to sell volatility on RMBS, it could have been a very expensive mistake. 
While RMBS may be an extreme example, it is certainly not alone. Many other 
stocks experienced similar changes in behavior. In this author's opinion, such behav­
ior debunks the usefulness of comparing historical volatility with past measures of 
historical volatility as a valid way of selecting volatility trades. 
FIGURE 39-2. 
Historical volatilities of RMBS. 
RMBS 19.000 17.250 18.875 20010410 
............ ······· 60.0 
· ·················· 50.0 
...... ······· 40. 0 
39 M i·h··-:; s ·~ s a ~--f:i--·5--r;;····~··h s·s- A s a N □ s--r·;; r 

===== PDF PAGE 883 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 823 
FIGURE 39-3. 
Stock chart of RMBS. 
19. 000 17. 250 18. 875 20010410 
30.000 
22. 000 
14. 000 
' ' : : 
! : : : ; 1 : : 1 r : ! : : : : ; : : : : : i l : l : 6. ooo 
99 M il M :i J ii s b N b J F M il M :i J il s b N b J F h 1 
What this method may be best used for is to complement the other methods 
described previously, in order to give the volatility trader some perspective on how 
volatile he can expect the underlying instrument to be; but it obviously has to be 
taken only as a general guideline. 
CHECK THE FUNDAMENTALS 
Once these mispriced options have been found, it is always imperative to check the 
news to see if there is some fundamental reason behind it. For example, if the options 
are extremely cheap and one then checks the news stories and finds that the under­
lying stock has been the beneficiary of an all-cash tender offer, he would not buy 
those options. The stock is not going to go anywhere, and in fact will disappear if the 
deal goes through as planned. 
Similarly, if the options appear to be very expensive, and one checks the news 
and finds that the underlying has a product up for review before a governmental 
agency (FDA, for example), then the options should not be sold because the stock 
may be about to undergo a large gap move based on the outcome of FDA hearings. 
There could be any number of similar corporate events that would make the options 
very expensive. The seller of volatility should not try to intercede when such events 
or rumors are occurring. 

===== PDF PAGE 884 =====
824 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatllity 
However, if there is no news that would seem to explain why the options are so 
cheap or so expensive, then the volatility trader can continue on to the rest of his 
analyses. 
SELECTING THE STRATEGY TO USE 
In general, when one wants to trade volatility, a simple approach is best, especially if 
one is buying volatility. If there is a volatility skew involved, then there may be other 
strategies that are superior, and they are discussed in the latter part of this chapter. 
However, when one is interested in the straight trading of volatility because he thinks 
implied volatility is out of line, then only a few strategies apply. 
If volatility is too low, then either a straddle or a strangle should be purchased. 
One would normally choose a straddle if the underlying instrument is currently trad­
ing near an available striking price. However, if the underlying is currently trading 
between two ~riking prices, then a strangle might be the better choice. In either case, 
a position trader would want to buy a straddle with several months of life remaining, 
in order to improve his chances of making a profit. There is no "best" time length to 
use, so one should use a probability calculator to aid in that decision. The use of prob­
ability calculators will be discussed shortly. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 39.60 and a volatility trader has determined that he wants 
to buy volatility. With this information, he should attempt to buy a straddle with a 
striking of 40 for both the put and the call. 
Suppose that the current date is in December, and the available expiration 
months for XYZ are January, February, April, July, and October, plus LEAPS for 
January of the next year. Then he would analyze each straddle (January 40, February 
40, April 40, etc.) to see which is the best one to buy. It generally seems to work out 
that the midrange straddles have the best probabilities of success, given the way that 
option prices are usually structured. Of course, the actual prices of each straddle 
would be considered when using the probability calculator. In this case, then, the July 
40 or October 40 straddle would probably be the best choices from a statistical view­
point for a position trader. 
If XYZ had been trading at a price of 37.50, say, then the trader would proba­
bly want to consider buying a strangle: buying a call with a striking price of 40 and a 
put with a striking price of 35. From the viewpoint of buying strangles, it does not 
make sense to separate the strikes by more than one striking price unit - 5 points for 
stock options, for example. This just makes the position more neutral to begin with. 

===== PDF PAGE 885 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 825 
Speaking of neutrality, one can also use the deltas of the options in question to 
alter the ratio of puts to calls, making the position initially as neutral as possible. This 
is the suggested approach, since the volatility buyer does not care whether the stock 
goes up or down. He is merely interested in stock movement and/or an increase in 
implied volatility. 
Example: XYZ is again trading at 39.60, and the trader wants a neutral position. He 
should use the deltas of the options to construct a neutral position. Consider the 
October 40 straddle, for example. Assume the volatility used for the probability cal­
culations is 40%. Under those conditions (and the ones assumed in the previous 
example), the October 40 call has a delta of 0.60 and the October 40 put has a delta 
of -0.40. Thus a ratio of buying 2 calls and 3 puts is a neutral ratio. If the call is sell­
ing for 6 and the put is selling for 5, then the break-even points for a 2-by-3 position 
would be 53.5 on the upside and 31 on the downside. This information is summarized 
as follows: 
Delta of October 40 call: 
Delta of October 40 put: 
+0.60 
-0.40 
Delta-neutral ratio: buy 2 calls and 3 puts 
Price of October 40 coll: 
Price of October 40 put: 
Net cost of 2-by-3 position: 27 points 
Break-even points: 
6.00 
5.00 
Upside = 40 + 27 /2 = 53.50 
Downside = 40 - 27 /3 = 31 .00 
So, the probability calculations would endeavor to determine what the chances are of 
the stock ever trading at either 53.50 or 31.00 at any time prior to expiration. In fact, 
since there are straddles available in several expiration months, the strategist would 
want to analyze each of them in a similar fashion. Table 39-1 shows how his choices 
might look. If one were considering buying a strangle, similar calculations could be 
made using the deltas of the put and the call, where the call strike is higher than the 
put strike. 
Another simple strategy that can be used when volatility is low is the calendar 
spread, because it has a positive vega. That is, it can be expected to expand if implied 
volatility increases. For most traders, though, the limited profit nature of the calen-

===== PDF PAGE 886 =====
826 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
TABLE 39-1 
January February April July October January LEAP 
Call price 1.25 2.25 3.50 5.00 6.00 7.15 
Put price 1.50 2.35 3.35 4.35 5.00 5.55 
Call delta 0.48 0.52 0.55 0.58 0.60 0.62 
Put delta -0.52 -0.48 -0.45 -0.42 -0.40 -0.38 
Neutral ~ 1-to-1 ~l-to-1 ~ 1-to-1 ~2-to-3 2-to-3 ~2-to-3 
Debit 2.75 4.60 6.85 23.05 27.00 30.95 
Upside break-even 42.75 44.60 46.85 51.57 53.50 55.47 
Downside break-even 37.25 35.40 33.15 32.30 31.00 29.68 
dar spread is too much of a burden"° either psychologically or in terms of commis­
sions, and so this strategy is only modestly used by volatility traders. Some traders will 
use the calendar spread if they don't see immediate prospects for an increase in 
implied volatility. They perhaps buy a call calendar slightly out-of-the-money and also 
buy a put calendar with slightly out-of-the-money puts. Then, if not much happens 
over the short term, the options that were sold expire worthless, and the remaining 
long straddle or strangle is even more attractive than ever. Of course, this strategy has 
its drawback in that a quick move by the underlying may result in a loss, something 
that would not have happened had a simple straddle or strangle been purchased. 
SELLING VOLATILITY 
If one were selling volatility (i.e., volatility is too high), his choices are more complex. 
Virtually anyone who has ever sold volatility has had a bad experience or two with 
either exploding stock prices or exploding volatility. Some of the concerns regarding 
the sale of volatility will be discussed at length later in this chapter. For now, the sim­
pler strategies will be considered, in keeping with the discussion involving the cre­
ation of a volatility trading position. 
Simplistically, a volatility seller would generally have a choice between one of 
two strategies (although there is a more complicated strategy that can be introduced 
as well). The simplest strategy is just to sell both an out-of-the-money put and an out­
of-the-money call. The striking prices chosen should be far enough away from the 
current underlying price so that the probabilities of the position getting in trouble 
(i.e., the probabilities that the underlying actually trades at the striking prices of the 
naked options during the life of the position) are quite small. Just as the option buyer 

===== PDF PAGE 887 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 827 
above outlined several expiration months, then computed the break-even prices, so 
should a volatility seller. Generally he will probably want to sell short-term options, 
but all expiration months should be considered, at least initially. Also, he may want to 
try different strike prices in order to get a balance between a low probability of the 
stock reaching the striking price of the naked options and taking in enough premium 
to make the trade worthwhile. To this author, the sale of naked options at small frac­
tional prices does not appear attractive. 
Of course, merely selling such a put and a call means the options are naked, and 
that strategy is not suitable for all traders. The next best choice then, I suppose, is a 
credit spread. The problem with a credit spread is that one is both selling expensive 
options and also buying expensive options as protection. The ramifications of volatil­
ity changes on the credit spread strategy were detailed two chapters previously, so 
they won't be recounted here, except to say that if volatility decreases, the profits to 
be realized by a credit spreader are quite small (perhaps not even enough to over­
come the commission expense of removing the position), whereas a naked option 
seller would benefit to a greater and more obvious extent. 
The choice between naked writing and credit spreading should be made based 
largely on the philosophy and psychological makeup of the trader himself. If one feels 
uncomfortable with naked options, or if he doesn't have the ability to watch the mar­
ket pretty much all the time (or have someone watch it for him), or ifhe doesn't have 
the financial wherewithal to margin the positions and carry them until the stock hits 
the break-even point, then naked writing is not for that trader. 
Another factor that might affect the choice of strategy for the option seller is 
what type of underlying instrument is being considered. Index options are by far the 
best choices for naked option selling. Futures are next, and stocks are last. This is 
because of the ways those various instruments behave; stocks have by far the great­
est capability of making huge gap moves that are the bane of naked option selling. So, 
if one has found expensive stock or futures options, that might lend more credence 
to the credit spread strategy. 
There is one other strategy that can be employed, upon occasion, when options 
are expensive. It is called the volatility backspread, but its discussion will be deferred 
until later in the chapter. 
USING A PROBABILITY CALCULATOR 
No matter which method is used to find options that are out of line, and no matter 
which strategy is preferred by the trader, it is still necessary to use a probability cal­
culator to get a meaningful idea of whether or not the underlying has the ability to 

===== PDF PAGE 888 =====
828 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
make the move to profitability (or not make the move into loss territory, if you're sell­
ing options). This is where historical volatility plays a big part, for it is the input into 
the probability calculator. In fact, no probability calculator will give reasonable pre­
dictions without a good estimate of volatility. Please refer to the previous chapter for 
a more in-depth discussion of probability calculators and stock price distributions. 
The use of probability analysis also mitigates some of the problems inherent in 
the method of selection that compares implied and historical volatilities. If the prob­
abilities are good for success, then we might not care so much whether the options 
are currently in a low percentile of implied volatility or not (although we still would 
not want to buy volatility when the options were in a high percentile of implied 
volatility and we would not want to sell options that are in a low percentile). 
In using the probability calculator, one first selects a strategy (straddle buying, 
for example, if options are cheap) and then calculates the break-even points as 
demonstrated in the previous section. Then the probability calculator is used to 
determine what the chances are of the underlying instrument ever trading at one or 
the other of those break-even prices at any time during the life of the option position. 
It was shown in the previous chapter that a Monte Carlo simulation using the fat tail 
distribution is best used for this process. 
An attractive volatility buying situation should have probabilities in excess of 
80% of the underlying ever exceeding the break-even point, while an attractive 
volatility selling situation should have probabilities of less than 25% of ever trading 
at prices that would cause losses. The volatility seller can, of course, heavily influence 
those probabilities by choosing options that are well out-of-the-money. As noted 
above, the volatility seller should, in fact, calculate the probabilities on several dif­
ferent striking prices, striving to find a balance between high probability of success 
and the ability to take in enough premium to make the risk worthwhile. 
Example: The OEX Index is trading at 650. Suppose that one has determined that 
volatilities are too high and wants to analyze the sale of some naked options. 
Furthermore, suppose that the choices have been narrowed down to selling the 
September options, which expire in about five weeks. The main choices under con­
sideration are those in Table 39-2. The option prices in this example, being index 
options, reflect a volatility skew (to be discussed later) to make the example realistic. 
The two right-hand columns should be rejected because the probabilities of 
the stock hitting one or the other of the striking prices prior to expiration are too 
high well in excess of the 25% guideline mentioned earlier. That leaves the 
September 500-800 strangle or the September 550-750 strangle to consider. The 
probabilities are best for the farthest out-of-the-money options (September 500-
800 strangle), but the options are selling at such small prices that they will not pro-

===== PDF PAGE 889 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 829 
TABLE 39-2 
September September September September 
800 call 750 call 730 call 700 call 
September September September September 
Naked sale: 500 put 550 put 570 put 600 put 
Call price 0.20 1.50 3.50 8.80 
Put price 0.40 2.00 3.70 8.50 
Probability of call strike 4% 17% 30% 44% 
Probability of put strike 1% 11% 20% 40% 
vide much of a return even if they expire worthless. Remember that one is 
required to establish the position with margin of at least 10% of the index price 
for naked index options, which would be $6,500 in this case. In fact, it has been 
recommended that one margin the position at the striking price itself (15% of 800, 
or $12,000 in this case). So, taking in only $60, less commissions, for the sale of 
the September 500-800 strangle doesn't seem to provide enough of a reward. 
Thus, the best choice seems to be the September 550-750 strangle. One would be 
making about $320 after commissions if the options expired worthless, and the 
recommended margin would be 15% of 750 (the higher strike), or $11,250 - a 
return of about 2.8% for one month. One cannot annualize these returns, for he 
has no idea if the same option pricing structure will exist in five weeks, when these 
options expire. 
Other probabilities can be calculated as well. For example, suppose one has 
decided to buy a straddle. He might want to know what the odds are not only of 
breaking even, but also of making at least a certain percentage return- say 20%. One 
could also calculate the probability of the stock moving 20% past the break-even 
points. That distance - 20% - is a reasonable figure to use because one would most 
likely be taking some partial profits or adjusting his position if the stock did indeed 
move that far. 
USING STOCK PRICE HISTORY 
All of the work done so far - determining which options are expensive, selecting a 
strategy, and calculating the probabilities of success - has been somewhat theoretical 
in that we haven't done any "back testing" with regard to the volatility of the under­
lying instruments. At this point, one should look at past prices to see if the stock has 
been able to make large moves (whether or not such a move is desired). 

===== PDF PAGE 890 =====
830 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Example: A trader is considering the purchase of the XYZ October 40 straddle for 
11 points, with the stock at 39.60. The options are cheap and the probabilities of suc­
cess appear to be good, according to the probability calculator. The question that now 
needs to be asked and answered is this: "In the past, has this stock been able to move 
11 points in 10 months (the time remaining in the straddle's life)?" Or, more impor­
tantly, since 11 divided by 39.60 is about 28%, "Has this stock been able to make 
moves of 28% over 10 months, in the past?" The answers to these questions can be 
readily obtained if stock price history data is available. One could even look at a chart 
of the stock and attempt to answer the questions himself without the aid of a com­
puter, but computer analysis of the price history is more rigorous and is therefore 
encouraged. 
The answers can be expressed in the form of probabilities, much as the results 
of the probability calculator are. 
Suppose one determines that the stock has been able to move 11 points in 10 
months 77% of the time in the past. That's okay, but not great. However, when one 
looks at the price chart ofXYZ, he sees that it traded at much lower prices - near $10 
a share - for a long time before rising to its current levels. It would be very hard to 
expect a $10 stock to move 11 points in 10 months. That's why the second figure, the 
one involving the 28% move, is the more significant one. In this case, one might find 
that XYZ has been able to move 28% in 10 months over 90% of the time in the past. 
Now one has what appears to be a decent-looking straddle buy. 
This analysis of past prices can be done in a more sophisticated manner. Rather than 
just asking whether or not the stock has moved the required distance in the past, one 
might want to see just how the stock's movements "look." That is, there are a couple 
of scenarios under which the past movements might look attractive, but upon closer 
examination, one would not be so sanguine. 
For example, what ifXYZ had repeatedly moved 28%, but never much more in 
most of the IO-month periods that comprise its stock history? Then, one would be 
less inclined to want to own this straddle. 
Another scenario of past movements might be that XYZ had made moves that 
one could not reasonably expect to be repeated. Perhaps there was a huge gap down 
on an earnings shortfall, or if it was an Internet stock around the tum of the millen­
nium, it had a huge move upward, followed by a huge move downward. That would 
be another nonrepeating type of move, because absent the Internet mania, the stock 
might have been a rather range-bound item both prior to and after the one huge, 
round-trip move. 

===== PDF PAGE 891 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 831 
FIGURE 39-4. 
Histogram of XYZ movements. {Testing 28% move in ten months.) 
15% 
X 
xx 
XXX 
X XXX 
XX XXX 
5% xxxxxxx xxxxxxx 
X XXXXXXXX 
XXX XXXXXXXX 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
-3 -2 -1 0 
Movement 
1 
X X 
X X X X 
XXX XX X XXXX 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
2 3 
These problems could be addressed by merely looking at the chart, but the 
naked eye can be deceiving in many cases. Rather, a more rigorous approach would 
be to construct a histogram of these past stock movements and analyze the histogram. 
Figure 39-4 shows such a histogram. The x-axis shows the magnitude of each 
10-month move that is in the database of XYZ stock prices. A move to 'T' would 
mean that it moved the 28% and no further over the 10-month period. A move to 
"-2" indicates that it fell 56% (twice the required distance) during the 10-month 
period. The y-axis (left-hand scale) shows the percentage of times that the move 
occurred. The sample histogram shown in Figure 39-4 is actually a very favorable 
one. Notice that the stock was always able to move at least 28%. Furthermore, it 
FIGURE 39-5. 
Example of poor movement. 
15% 
10% 
5% 
-3 -2 
X 
xx xx xxxx 
X XXXX XXXX 
X 
X X 
xx xxxx,"lrx~x~x~x--...----=.:.;:r· 
0 
X 
X 
X XXX 
2 3 

===== PDF PAGE 892 =====
832 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
moved two or three times that far with great frequency. Finally, there is a continu­
ity to the points on the histogram: There are some y-axis data points at almost all 
points on the x-axis (between the minimum and maximum x-axis points). That is 
good, because it shows that there has not been a clustering of movements by XYZ 
that might have dominated past activity. 
As for what is not a "good" histogram, we would not be so enamored of a his­
togram that showed a huge cluster of points near and between the "-1" and 'T' points 
on the X-axis. We want the stock to have shown an ability to move farther than just the 
break-even distance, if possible. As an example, see Figure 39-5, which shows a stock 
whose movements rarely exceed the "-1" or "+l" points, and even when they do, they 
don't exceed it by much. Most of these would be losing trades because, even though 
the stock might have moved the required percentage, that was its maximum move 
during the 10-month period, and there is no way that a trader would know to take 
profits exactly at that time. The straddles described by the histogram in Figure 39-5 
should not be bought, regardless of what the previous analyses might have shown. 
Nor would it be desirable for the histogram to show a large number of move­
ments above the "+3" level on the histogram, with virtually nothing below that. Such 
a histogram would most likely be reflective of the spiky, Internet-type stock activity 
that was referred to earlier as being unreasonable to expect that it might repeat itself. 
In a general sense, one doesn't want to see too many open spaces on the histogram's 
X-axis; continuity is desired. 
If the histogram is a favorable one, then the volatility analysis is complete. One 
would have found mispriced options, with a good theoretical probability of profit, 
whose past stock movements verify that such movements are feasible in the future. 
ANOTHER APPROACH? 
After having considered the descriptions of all of these analyses, one other approach 
comes to mind: Use the past movements exclusively and ignore the other analyses 
altogether. This sounds somewhat radical, but it is certainly a valid approach. It's 
more like giving some rigor to the person who "knows" IBM can move 18 points and 
who therefore wants to buy the straddle. If the histogram (study of past movements) 
tells us that IBM does, indeed, have a good chance of moving 18 points, what do we 
really care about the relationship of implied and historical volatility, or about the cur­
rent percentiles of either type of volatility, or what a theoretical probability calcula­
tor might say? In some sense, this is like comparing implied volatility (the price of the 
straddle) with historical volatility (the history of stock price movements) in a strictly 
practical sense, not using statistics. 

===== PDF PAGE 893 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 833 
In reality, one would have to be mindful of not buying overly expensive options ( or 
selling overly cheap ones), because implied volatility cannot be ignored. However, the 
price of the straddle itself, which is what determines the x-axis on the histogram, does 
reflect option prices, and therefore implied volatility, in a nontechnical sense. This author 
suspects that a list of volatility trading candidates generated only by using past movements 
would be a rather long list. Therefore, as a practical matter, it may not be useful. 
MORE THOUGHTS ON SELLING VOLATILITY 
Earlier, it was promised that another, more complex volatility selling strategy would 
be discussed. An option strategist is often faced with a difficult choice when it comes 
to selling (overpriced) options in a neutral manner - in other words, "selling volatili­
ty." Many traders don't like to sell naked options, especially naked equity options, yet 
many forms of spreads designed to limit risk seem to force the strategist into a direc­
tional (bullish or bearish) strategy that he doesn't really want. This section addresses 
the more daunting prospect of trying to sell volatility with protection in the equity 
and futures option markets. 
The quandary in trying to sell volatility is in trying to find a neutral strategy that 
allows one to benefit from the sale of expensive options without paying too much for 
a hedge - the offsetting purchase of equally expensive options. The simple strategy 
that most traders first attempt is the credit spread. Theoretically, if implied volatility 
were to fall during the time the credit spread position is in place, a profit might be 
realized. However, after commissions on four different options in and possibly out 
(assuming one sold both out-of-the-money put and call spreads), there probably 
wouldn't be any real profit left if the position were closed out early. In sum, there is 
nothing really wrong with the credit spread strategy, but it just doesn't seem like any­
thing to get too excited about. What other strategy can be used that has limited risk 
and would benefit from a decline in implied volatility? The highest-priced options are 
the longer-term ones. If implied volatility is high, then if one can sell options such as 
these and hedge them, that might be a good strategy. 
The simplest strategy that has the desired traits is selling a calendar spread 
that is, sell a longer-term option and hedge it by buying a short-term option at the 
same strike. True, both are expensive (and the near-term option might even have a 
slightly higher implied volatility than the longer-term one). But the longer-term one 
trades with a far greater absolute price, so if both become cheaper, the longer-term 
one can decline quite a bit farther in points than the near-term one. That is, the vega 
of the longer-term option is greater than the vega of the shorter-term one. When one 
sells a calendar spread, it is called a reverse calendar spread. The strategy was 

===== PDF PAGE 894 =====
834 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
described in the chapter on reverse spreads. The reader might want to review that 
chapter, not only for the description of the strategy, but also for the description of the 
margin problems inherent in reverse spreads on stocks and indices. 
One of the problems that most traders have with the reverse calendar spread is 
that it doesn't produce very large profits. The spread can theoretically shrink to zero 
after it is sold, but in reality it will not do so, for the longer-term option will retain 
some amount of time value premium even if it is very deeply in- or out-of-the-money. 
Hence the spread ·will never really shrink to zero. 
Yet, there is another approach that can often provide larger profit potential and 
still retain the potential to make money if implied volatility decreases. In some sense 
it is a modification of the reverse calendar spread strategy that can create a poten­
tially even more desirable position. The strategy, known as a volatility backspread, 
involves selling a long-term at-the-money option (just as in the reverse calendar 
spread) and then buying a greater number of near-er term out-of-the-money options. 
The position is generally constructed to be delta-neutral and it has a negative vega, 
meaning that it will profit if implied volatility decreases. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 115 in early June. Its options are very expensive. A trad­
er would like to construct a volatility backspread using the following two options: 
Call Option 
July 130 call: 
October 120 call: 
Price 
2.50 
13 
Delta 
0.26 
0.53 
Vega 
0.10 
0.27 
A delta-neutral position would be to buy 2 of the July 130 calls and sell one of 
the October 120 calls. This would bring in a credit of 8 points. Also, it would have a 
small negative position vega, since tvvo times the vega of the July calls minus one 
times the vega of the October call is -0.07. That is, for each one percentage point 
drop in implied volatility of XYZ options in general, this position would make $7 -
not a large amount, but it is a small position. 
The profitability of the position is shown in Figure 39-6. This strategy has lim­
ited risk because it does not involve naked options. In fact, if XYZ were to rally by a 
good distance, one could make large profits because of the extra long call. 
Meanwhile, on the downside, if XYZ falls heavily, all the options would lose most of 
their value and one would have a profit approaching the amount of the initial credit 
received. Furthermore, a decrease in implied volatility produces a small profit as 
well, although time decay may not be in the trader's favor, depending on exactly 
which short-term options were bought. The biggest risk is that XYZ is exactly at 130 
at July expiration, so any strategist employing this strategy should plan to close it out 

===== PDF PAGE 895 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 
FIGURE 39-6. 
Volatility backspread neutral position. 
Underlying Price 
835 
in advance of the near-term expiration. It should not be allowed to deteriorate to the 
point of maximum loss. 
Modifications to the strategy can be considered. One is to sell even longer-term 
options and of course hedge them with the purchase of the near-term options. The 
longer-term the option is, the bigger its vega will be, so a decrease in implied volatil­
ity will cause the heftier-priced long-term option to decline more in price. This mod­
ification is somewhat tempered, though, by the fact that when options get really 
expensive, there is often a tendency for the near-term options to be skewed. That is, 
the near-term options will be trading with a much higher implied volatility than will 
the longer-term options. This is especially true for LEAPS options. For that reason, 
one should make sure that he is not entering into a situation in which the shorter­
term options could lose volatility while the longer-term ones more or less retain the 
same implied volatility, as LEAPS options often do. This concept of differing volatil­
ity between near- and long-term options was discussed in more detail in Chapter 36 
on the basics of volatility trading. As a sort of general rule, if one finds that the longer­
term option has a much lower implied volatility than the one you were going to buy, 
this strategy is not recommended. As a corollary, then, it is unlikely that this strate­
gy will work well with LEAPS options. 
One other thing that you should analyze when looking for this type of trade is 
whether it might be better to use the puts than the calls. For one thing, you can estab­
lish a position in which the heavy profitability is on the downside (as opposed to the 
upside, as in the XYZ example above). Then, of course, having considered that, it 
might actually behoove one to establish both the call spread and the put spread. If 

===== PDF PAGE 896 =====
836 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
you do both, though, you create a "good news, bad news" situation. The good news 
is that the maximum risk is reduced; for example, if XYZ goes exactly to 130 (the 
worst point for the call spread), the companion put spread's credit would reduce that 
risk a little. However, the bad news is that there is a much wider range over which 
there is not profit, since there are two spots where losses are more or less maximized 
(at the strike price of the long calls and again at the strike price of the long puts). 
Margin will be discussed only briefly, since it was addressed in the chapter on 
reverse spreads. For both index and stock options, this strategy is considered to have 
naked options - a preposterous assumption, since one can see from the profit graph 
that the position is fully hedged until the near-term options expire. This raises the 
capital requirement for nonmember traders. The margin anomaly is not a problem 
with futures options, however. For those options, one need only margin the differ­
ence in the strikes, less any credit received, because that is the true risk of the posi­
tion. In summary, the volatility trader who wants to sell volatility in equity and futures 
options markets needs to be hedged, because gaps are prevalent and potentially very 
costly. This strategy creates a more neutral, less price-dependent way to benefit if 
implied volatility decreases, especially when compared with simple credit spreads. 
SUMMARY: TRADING THE 
VOLATILITY PREDICTION 
Attempting to establish trades when implied volatility is out of line is a theoretically 
attractive strategy. The process outlined above consisted of a few steps, employing 
both statistical and theoretical analysis. In any case, though, probability calculators 
must "say" that a volatility trade has good probabilities of success. It's merely a mat­
ter of what criteria we apply to limit our choices before we run the probability analy­
sis. So, it might be more useful to view volatility trading analysis in this light: 
Step I: Use a selection criterion to limit the myriad of volatility trading choices. Any 
of these could be used as the first criterion, but not all of them at once: 
a. Require implied volatility to be at an extreme percentile. 
b. Require historical and implied volatility to have a large discrepancy 
between them. 
c. Interpret the chart of implied volatility to see if it has reversed trend. 
Step 2: Use a probability calculator to project whether the strategy can be expected 
to be a success. 
Step 3: Using past price histories, determine whether the underlying has been able 
to create profitable trades in the past. (For example, if one is considering 

===== PDF PAGE 897 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 837 
buying a straddle, ask the question, "Has this stock been able to move far 
enough, with great enough frequency, to make this straddle purchase prof­
itable?") Use histograms to ensure that the past distribution of stock prices 
is smooth, so that an aberrant, nonrepeatable move is not overly influenc­
ing the results. 
Each criterion from Step 1 would produce a different list of viable volatility 
trading candidates on any given day. If a particular candidate were to appear on more 
than one of the lists, it might be the best situation of all. 
TRADING THE VOLATILITY SKEW 
In the early part of this chapter, it was mentioned that there are two ways in which 
volatility predictions could be "wrong." The first was that implied volatility was out of 
line. The second is that individual options on the same underlying instrument have 
significantly different implied volatilities. This is called a volatility skew, and presents 
trading opportunities in its own right. 
DIFFERING IMPLIED VOLATILITIES ON THE SAME UNDERLYING SECURITY 
The implied volatility of an option is the volatility that one would have to use as input 
to the Black-Scholes model in order for the result of the model to be equal to the 
current market price of the option. Each option will thus have its own implied volatil­
ity. Generally, they will be fairly close to each other in value, although not exactly the 
same. However, in some cases, there will be large enough discrepancies between the 
individual implied volatilities to warrant the strategist's attention. It is this latter con­
dition of large discrepancies that will be addressed in this section. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 45. The following option prices exist, along with their 
implied volatilities: 
Actual Implied 
Option Price Volatility 
January 45 call 2.75 41% 
January 50 call 1.25 47% 
January 55 call 0.63 53% 
February 45 call 3.50 38% 
February 50 call 4.00 45% 

===== PDF PAGE 898 =====
838 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Note that the implied volatilities of the individual options range from a low of 
38% to a high of 53%. This is a rather large discrepancy for options on the same 
underlying security, but it is useful for exemplary purposes. 
A neutral strategy could be established by buying options with lower implied 
volatilities and simultaneously selling ones with higher volatilities, such as buy 10 
February 45 calls and sell 20 January 50 calls. Examples of neutral spreads will be 
expanded upon in the next chapter, when more exact measures for determining how 
many calls to buy and sell are discussed. 
Before jumping into such a position, the strategist should ask himself if there is 
a valid reason why the different options have such different implied volatilities. As a 
generalization, it might be fair to say that out-of-the-money options have slightly 
higher implieds than at-the-money ones, and that longer-term options have lower 
implieds than short-term ones. But there are many instances in which such is not the 
case, so one must be careful not to overgeneralize. 
Speculators often desire the lowest dollar-cost option available. Thus, in a 
takeover rumor situation, they would buy the out-of-the-moneys as opposed to the 
higher-priced at- or in-the-moneys. If the out-of-the-moneys are extremely expen­
sive because of a takeover rumor, then the strategist must be careful, because the 
neutral strategy concept may lead him into selling naked calls. This is not to say 
he should avoid the situation altogether; he may be able to structure a position 
with enough upside room to protect himself, or he may believe the rumors are 
false. 
Returning to the general topic of differing implied volatilities on the same 
underlying stock, the strategist might ask how he is to determine if the discrepancies 
between the individual options are significantly large to warrant attention. A mathe­
matical approach is presented at the end of the next chapter in a section on advanced 
mathematical concepts. Suffice it to say that there is a way that the differences in the 
various implieds can be reduced to a single number - a sort of "standard deviation of 
the implieds" that is easy for the strategist to use. A list of these numbers can be con­
structed, comparing which stocks or futures might be candidates for this type of neu­
tral spreading. On a given day, the list is usually quite short - perhaps 20 stocks and 
10 futures contracts will qualify. 
The concept of the implied volatilities of various options on the same underly­
ing stock remaining out of line with each other is one that needs more discussion. In 
the following section, the idea of semipermanent distortion between the volatilities 
of different striking prices is discussed. 

===== PDF PAGE 899 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 
VOLATILITY SKEWING 
839 
After the stock market crashed in 1987, index options experienced what has since 
proven to be a permanent distortion: Out-of-the-money puts have remained more 
expensive than out-of-the-money calls. Furthermore, out-of-the-money puts are 
more expensive than at-the-money puts; out-of-the-money calls are cheaper than at­
the-money calls. This distorted effect is due to several factors, but it is so deep-seat­
ed that it has remained through all kinds of up and down markets since then. Other 
markets, particularly futures markets, have also experienced a long-lasting distortion 
between the implied volatilities at various strikes. 
The proper name given to this phenomenon is volatility skewing: the long-last­
ing effect whereby options at different striking prices trade with differing implied 
volatilities. It should be noted that the calls and puts at the same strike must trade 
for the same implied volatility; otherwise, conversion or reversal arbitrage would 
eliminate the difference. However, there is no true arbitrage between different strik­
ing prices. Hence, arbitrage cannot eliminate volatility skewing. 
Example: Volatility skewing exists in OEX index options. Assume the average volatil­
ity of OEX and its options is 16%. With volatility skewing present, the implied volatil­
ities at the various striking prices might look like this: 
OEX: 580 
Implied Volatility 
Strike of Both Puts and Calls 
550 22% 
560 19% 
570 17% 
580 16% 
590 15% 
600 14% 
610 13% 
In this form of volatility skewing, the out-of-the-money puts are the most 
expensive options; the out-of-the-money calls are the cheapest. This pattern of 
implied volatilities is called a reverse volatility skew or, alternatively, a negative 
volatility skew. 

===== PDF PAGE 900 =====
840 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
The causes of this effect stem from the stock market's penchant to crash occa­
sionally. Investors who want protection buy index puts; they don't sell index futures 
as much as they used to because of the failure of the portfolio insurance strategy dur­
ing the 1987 crash. In addition, margin requirements for selling naked index puts 
have increased, especially for market-makers, who are the main suppliers of naked 
puts. Consequently, demand for index puts is high and supply is low. Therefore, out­
of-the-money index puts are overly expensive. 
This does not entirely explain why index calls are so cheap. Part of the reason 
for that is that institutional traders can help finance the cost of those expensive index 
puts by selling some out-of-the-money index calls. Such sales would essentially be 
covered calls if the institution owned stocks, which it most certainly would. This strat­
egy is called a collar. 
This distortion in volatilities is not in accordance with the probability distribu­
tion of stock prices. These distorted implied volatilities define a different probability 
curve for stock movement. They seem to say that there is more chance of the market 
dropping than there is of it rising. This is not true; in fact, just the opposite is true. 
Refer to the reasons for using lognormal distribution to define stock price move­
ments. Consequently, there are opportunities to profit from volatility skewing, if one 
is able to hold the position until expiration. 
It was shown in previous examples that one would attempt to sell the options 
with higher implied volatilities and buy ones with lower implieds as a hedge. Hence, 
for OEX traders, three strategies seem relevant: 
1. Buy a bear put spread in OEX. 
Example: Buy 10 OEX June 560 puts 
Sell IO OEX June 540 puts 
2. Buy OEX puts and sell a larger number of out-of-the-money puts - a ratio write 
of put options. 
Example: Buy 10 OEX June 560 puts 
Sell 20 OEX June 550 puts 
3. Sell OEX calls and buy a larger number of out-of-the-money calls - a backspread 
of call options. 
Example: Buy 20 OEX June 590 calls 
Sell IO OEX June 580 calls 
In all three cases, one is selling the higher implied volatility and buying options 
with lower implied volatilities. The first strategy is a simple bear spread. While it will 

===== PDF PAGE 901 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 841 
benefit from the fact that the options are skewed in terms of implied volatility, it is not 
a neutral strategy. It requires that the underlying drop in price in order to become 
profitable. There is nothing wrong with using a directional strategy like this, but the 
strategist must be aware that the skew is unlikely to disappear ( until expiration) and 
therefore the index price movement is going to be necessary for profitability. 
The second strategy would be best suited for moderately bearish investors, 
although a severe market decline might drive the index so low that the additional 
short puts could cause severe losses. However, statistically this is an attractive strat­
egy. At expiration, the volatility skewing must disappear; the markets will have moved 
in line with their real probability distribution, not the false one being implied by the 
skewed options. This makes for a potentially profitable situation for the strategist. 
The backspread strategy would work best for bullish investors, although some 
backspreads can be created for credits, so a little money could also be made if the 
index fell. In theory, a strategist could implement both strategies simultaneously, 
which would give him an edge over a wide range of index prices. Again, this does not 
mean that he cannot lose money; it merely means that his strategy is statistically 
superior because of the way the options are priced. That is, the odds are in his favor. 
In reality, though, a neutral trader would choose either the ratio spread or the 
backspread - not both. As a general rule of thumb, one would use the ratio spread 
strategy if the current level of implied volatility were in a high percentile. The back­
spread strategy would be used if implied volatility were in a low percentile current­
ly. In that way, a movement of implied volatility back toward the 50th percentile 
would also benefit the trade that is in place. 
Another interesting thing happens in these strategies that may be to their ben­
efit: The volatility skewing that is present propagates itself throughout the striking 
prices as OEX moves around. It was shown in the previous section's example that one 
should probably continue to project his profits using the distorted volatilities that 
were present when he establishes a position. This is a conservative approach, but a 
correct one. In the case of these OEX spreads, it may be a benefit. 
Assuming that the skewing is present wherever OEX is trading means that the 
at-the-money strike will have 16% as its implied volatility regardless of the absolute 
price level; the skewing will then extend out from that strike. So, if OEX rises to 600, 
then the 600 strike would have a volatility of 16%; or if it fell to 560, then the 560 
puts and calls would have a volatility of 16%. Of course, 16% is just a representative 
figure; the "average" volatility of OEX can change as well. For illustrative purposes, 
it is convenient to assume that the at-the-money strike keeps a constant volatility. 
Example: Initially, a trader establishes a call backspread in OEX options in order to 
take advantage of the volatility skewing: 

===== PDF PAGE 902 =====
842 
Initial situation: OEX: 580 
Option 
June 590 call 
June 600 call 
A neutral spread would be: 
Buy 2 June 600 calls 
Sell I June 590 call 
Implied Volatility 
15% 
14% 
since the deltas are in the ratio of 2-to-l. 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Delta 
0.40 
0.20 
Now, suppose that OEX rises to 600 at a later date, but well before expiration. 
This is not a particularly attractive price for this position. Recall that, at expiration, a 
backspread has its worst result at the striking price of the purchased options. Even 
prior to expiration, one would not expect to have a profit with the index right at 600. 
However, the statistical advantage that the strategist had to begin with might be 
able to help him out. The present situation would probably look like this: 
Option 
June 590 call 
June 600 call 
Implied Volatility 
17% 
16% 
The June 600 call is now the at-the-money call, since OEX has risen to 600. As 
such, its implied volatility will be 16% ( or whatever the "average" volatility is for OEX 
at that time - the assumption is made that it is still 16% ). The June 590 call has a 
slightly higher volatility (17%) because volatility skewing is still present. 
Thus, the options that are long in this spread have had their implied volatility 
increase; that is a benefit. Of course, the options that are short had theirs increase as 
well, but the overall spread should benefit for two reasons: 
1. Twice as many options are owned as were sold. 
2. The effect of increased volatility is greatest on the at-the-money option; the in­
the-money will be affected to a lesser degree. 
All index options exhibit this volatility skewing. Volatility skewing exists in other 
markets as well. The other markets where volatility skewing is prevalent are usually 

===== PDF PAGE 903 =====
Chapter 39: Volatility Trading Techniques 843 
futures option markets. In particular, gold, silver, sugar, soybeans, and coffee options 
will from time to time display a form of volatility skewing that is the opposite of that 
displayed by index options. In these futures markets, the cheapest options are out-of­
the-money puts, while the most expensive options are out-of-the-money calls. 
Example: January soybeans are trading at 580 ($5.80 per bushel). The following 
table of implied volatilities shows how volatility skewing that is present in the soybean 
market is the opposite of that shown by the OEX market in the previous examples: 
January beans: 580 
Strike Implied Volatility 
525 12% 
550 13% 
575 15% 
600 17% 
625 19% 
650 21% 
675 23% 
Notice that the out-of-the-money calls are now the more expensive items, while 
out-of-the-money puts are the cheapest. This pattern of implied volatilities is called 
forward volatility skew or, alternatively, positive volatility skew. 
The distribution of soybean prices implied by these volatilities is just as incor­
rect as the OEX one was for the stock market. This soybean implied distribution is 
too bullish. It implies that there is a much larger probability of the soybean market 
rising 100 points than there is of it falling 50 points. That is incorrect, considering the 
historical price movement of soybeans. 
A strategist attempting to benefit from the forward ( or positive) volatility skew 
in this market has essentially three strategies available. They are the opposite of the 
three recommended for the $OEX, which had a reverse (or negative) volatility skew. 
First would be a call bull spread, second would be a put backspread, and third would 
be a call ratio spread. In all three cases, one would be buying options at the lower 
striking price and selling options at the higher striking price. This would give him the 
theoretical advantage. 
The same sorts of comments that were made about the OEX strategies can be 
applied here. The bull spread is a directional strategy and can probably only be 
expected to make money if the underlying rises in price, despite the statistical advan-

===== PDF PAGE 904 =====
844 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatiRty 
tage of the volatility skew. The put backspread is best established when the overall 
level of implied volatility is in a low percentile. Finally, the call ratio spread has a 
great deal of risk to the upside ( and futures prices can fly to the upside quickly, espe­
cially if bad fundamental conditions develop, such as weather in the grain markets). 
The call ratio spread would best be used when implied volatilities are already in a 
high percentile. 
As a general comment, it should be noted that if the volatility skew disappears 
while the trader has the position in place, a profit will generally result. It would nor­
mally behoove the strategist to take the profit at that time. Otherwise, follow-up 
action should adhere to the general kinds of action recommended for the strategies 
in question: protective action to prevent large losses in the case of the ratio spreads, 
or the taking of partial profits and possibly rolling the long options to a more at-the­
money strike in the case of the backspread strategies. 
SUMMARY OF VOLATILITY SKEWING 
Whenever volatility skewing exists - no matter what market - opportunities arise for 
the neutral strategist to establish a position that has advantages. These advantages 
arise out of the fact that normal market movements are different from what the 
options are implying. Moreover, the options are wrong when there is skewing at all 
strikes, from the lowest to the highest. The strategist should be careful to project his 
profits prior to expiration using the same skewing, for it may persist for some time to 
come. However, at expiration, it must of course disappear. Therefore, the strategist 
who is planning to hold the position to expiration will find that volatility skewing has 
presented him with an opportunity for a positive expected return. 
SUMMARY OF VOLATILITY TRADING 
The theoretical trading of options, mostly in a neutral manner, has evolved into one 
large branch - volatility trading. This part of the book has attempted to lay out the 
foundations, structures, and practices prevalent in this branch of trading. As the read­
er can see, there are some sophisticated techniques being applied - not so much in 
terms of strategy, but in terms of the ways that one looks at volatility and in the ways 
that stocks can move. 
Statistical methods are used liberally in trying to determine the ways that either 
volatility can move or stocks can move. The probability calculators, stock price dis­
tributions, and related topics are all statistical in nature. The volatility trader is intent 
on finding situations in which current market implied volatility is incorrect, either in 
its absolute value or in the skew that is prevalent in the options on a particular under-

===== PDF PAGE 905 =====
Chapter 39: VolatiDty Trading Techniques 845 
lying instrument. Upon finding such discrepancies, the trader attempts to take 
advantage by constructing a more or less neutral position, preferring not to predict 
price so much, but rather attempting to predict volatility. 
Most volatility traders attempt to buy volatility rather than sell it, for the rea­
sons that the strategies inherent in doing so have limited risk and large potential 
rewards, and don't require one to monitor them continuously. If one owns a straddle, 
any major market movements resulting in gaps in prices are a benefit. Hence, mon­
itoring of positions as little as just once a day is sufficient, a fact that means that the 
volatility buyer can have a life apart from watching a trading screen all day long. In 
addition, volatility buyers of stock options can avail themselves of the chaotic move­
ments that stocks can make, taking advantage of the occasional fat tail movements. 
However, since volatility and prices are so unstable, one cannot predict their 
movements with any certainty. The vagaries of historical volatility as compared to 
implied volatility, the differences between the implied volatility of short- and long­
term options, and the difficulty in predicting stock price distributions all compli­
cate the process of predicting volatility. Hence, volatility trading is not a "lock," but 
its practitioners normally believe that it is by far the best approach to theoretical 
option trading available today. Moreover, most option professionals primarily trade 
volatility rather than directional positions. 
===== SOURCE CHAPTER 40 | PDF PAGES 906-970 =====

===== PDF PAGE 906 =====
, CHAPTER 40 
Advanced Concepts 
As the option markets have matured, strategists have been forced to rely more on 
mathematics in order to select new positions as well as to discern how their positions 
will behave in fluctuating markets. These techniques can be used on simple strategies, 
such as bull spreads or ratio spreads, or on far more complex portfolios of options. 
First, the concept of implied volatility will be examined in more detail, prima­
rily as an aid in choosing new positions that have a positive expected return. Then, 
the concept of risk management will be explored. In effect, one can reduce his option 
position into several components of risk measurement that can be readily under­
stood. This chapter describes the techniques used to evaluate one's position, and 
shows how to use this information to reduce the risk in the position. The actual math­
ematical calculations required to perform these analyses are included at the end of 
the chapter. 
NEUTRALITY 
In many of the examples in previous chapters, it was generally assumed that one 
would take a "neutral" position in order to capture the pricing or volatility differen­
tial. Why this concentration on neutrality? Neutrality, as it applies to option positions, 
means that one is noncommittal with respect to at least one of the factors that influ­
ence an option's price. Simply put, this means that one can design an option position 
in which he can profit, no matter which way the underlying security moves. 
846 

===== PDF PAGE 907 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 847 
Most option strategies fall into one of two categories: as a hedge to a stock or 
futures strategy (for example, buying puts to protect a portfolio of stocks), or as a 
profit venture unto itself. The latter category is where most traders find themselves, 
and they often approach it in a fairly speculative manner - either by buying options 
or by being a premium seller (covered or uncovered). In such strategies, the trader 
is taking a view of the market; he needs certain price action from the underlying 
security in order to profit. Even covered call writing, which is considered to be a con­
servative strategy, is subject to large losses if the underlying stock drops drastically. 
It doesn't have to be that way. Strategies can be devised that will have a chance 
to profit regardless of price changes in the underlying stock, as well as because of 
them. Such strategies are neutral strategies and they always require at least two 
options in the position - a spread, straddle, or some other combination. Often, when 
one constructs a neutral strategy, he is neutral with respect to price changes in the 
underlying security. It is also possible, and often wise, to be neutral with respect to 
the rate of price change of the underlying security, with respect to the volatility of 
the security, or with respect to time decay. This is not to imply that any option spread 
that is neutral will automatically be a money-maker; rather, one looks for an 
opportunity - perhaps an overpriced series of options - and attempts to capture that 
overpricing by constructing a neutral strategy around it. Then, regardless of the 
movement of the underlying stock, the strategist has a chance of making money if the 
overpricing disappears. 
Note that the neutral approach is distinctly different from the speculator's, who, 
upon determining that he has discovered an underpriced call, would merely buy the 
call, hoping for the stock to increase in price. He would not make money if XYZ fell 
in price unless there was a huge expansion in implied volatility - not something to 
count on. The next section of this chapter deals with how one determines his neu­
trality. In effect, if he is not neutral, then he has risk of some sort. The following sec­
tions outline various measures of risk that the strategist can use to establish a new 
position or manage an existing one. 
The most important of these risk measurements is how much market exposure 
the position currently has. This has previously been described as the "delta." Of near­
ly equal importance to the strategist is how much the option strategy will change with 
respect to the rate of change in the price of the underlying security. Also of interest 
are how changes in volatility, in time remaining until expiration, or even in the risk­
free interest rate will affect the position. Once the components of the option position 
are defined, the strategist can then take action to reduce the risk associated with any 
of the factors, should he so desire. 

===== PDF PAGE 908 =====
848 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatmty 
THE "GREEKS" 
Risk measurements have generally been given the names of actual or contrived 
Greek letters. For example, "delta" was discussed in previous chapters. It has become 
common practice to refer to the exposure of an option position merely by describing 
it in terms of this "Greek" nomenclature. For example, "delta long 200 shares" means 
that the entire option position behaves as if the strategist were merely long 200 shares 
of the underlying stock. In all, there are six components, but only four are heavily 
used. 
DELTA 
The first risk measurement that concerns the option strategist is how much current 
exposure his option position has as the underlying security moves. This is called the 
"delta." In fact, the term delta is commonly used in at least two different contexts: to 
express the amount by which an option changes for a I-point move in the underlying 
security, or to describe the equivalent stock position of an entire option portfolio. 
Reviewing the definition of the delta of an individual option (first described in 
Chapter 3), recall that the delta is a number that ranges between 0.0 and 1.0 for calls, 
and between -1.0 and 0.0 for puts. It is the amount by which the option will move if 
the underlying stock moves 1 point; stated another way, it is the percentage of any 
stock price change that will be reflected in the change of price of the option. 
Example: Assume an XYZ January 50 call has a delta of 0.50 with XYZ at a price of 
49. This means that the call will move 50% as fast as the stock will move. So, if XYZ 
jumps to 51, a gain of 2 points, then the January 50 call can be expected to increase 
in price by 1 point (50% of the stock increase). 
In another context, the delta of a call is often thought of as the probability of the 
call being in-the-money at expiration. That is, ifXYZ is 50 and the January 55 call has 
a delta of 0.40, then there is a 40% probability that XYZ will be over 55 at January 
expiration. 
Put deltas are expressed as negative numbers to indicate that put prices move 
in the opposite direction from the underlying security. Recall that deltas of out-of­
the-money options are smaller numbers, tending toward 0 as the option becomes 
very far out-of-the-money. Conversely, deeply in-the-money calls have deltas 
approaching 1.0, while deeply in-the-money puts have deltas approaching -1.0. 
Note: Mathematically, the delta of an option is the partial derivative of the 
Black-Scholes equation ( or whatever formula one is using) with respect to stock 
price. Graphically, it is the slope of a line that is tangent to the option pricing curve. 

===== PDF PAGE 909 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 849 
Let us now take a look at how both volatility and time affect the delta of a call 
option. Much of the data to be presented in this chapter will be in both tabular and 
graphical form, since some readers prefer one style or the other. 
The volatility of the underlying stock has an effect on delta. If the stock is not 
volatile, then in-the-money options have a higher delta, and out-of-the-money 
options have a lower delta. Figure 40-1 and Table 40-1 depict the deltas of various 
calls on two stocks with differing volatilities. The deltas are shown for various strike 
prices, with the time remaining to expiration equal to 3 months and the underlying 
stock at a price of 50 in all cases. Note that the graph confirms the fact that a low­
volatility stock's in-the-money options have the higher delta. The opposite holds true 
for out-of-the-money options: The high-volatility stock's options have the higher delta 
in that case. Another way to view this data is that a higher-volatility stock's options will 
always have more time value premium than the low-volatility stock's. In-the-money, 
these options with more time value will not track the underlying stock price move­
ment as closely as ones with little or no time value. Thus, in-the-money, the low­
volatility stock's options have the higher delta, since they track the underlying stock 
price movements more closely. Out-of-the-money, the entire price of the option is 
composed of time value premium. The ones with higher time value (the ones on the 
high-volatility stock) will move more since they have a higher price. Thus, out-of-the­
money, the higher-volatility stock's options have the greater delta. 
Time also affects delta. Figures 40-2 (see Table 40-2) and 40-4 show the rela­
tionships between time and delta. Figure 40-2's scales are similar to those in Figure 
40-2, delta vs. volatility: The deltas are shown for various striking prices, with XYZ 
assumed to be equal to 50 in all cases. Notice that in-the-money, the shorter-term 
options have the higher delta. Again, this is because they have the least time value 
premium. Out-of-the-money, the opposite is true: The longer-term options have the 
higher deltas, since these options have the most time value premium. 
Figure 40-3 (see Table 40-3) depicts the delta for an XYZ January 50 call with 
XYZ equal to 50. The horizontal axis in this graph is "weeks until expiration." Note 
that the delta of a longer-term at-the-money option is larger than that of a shorter­
term option. In fact, the delta shrinks more rapidly as expiration draws nearer. Thus, 
even if a stock remains unchanged and its volatility is constant, the delta of its options 
will be altered as time passes. This is an important point to note for the strategist, 
since he is constantly monitoring the risk characteristics of his position. He cannot 
assume that his position is the same just because the stock has remained at the same 
price for a period of time. 
Position Delta. Another usage of the term delta is what has previously been 
referred to as the equivalent stock position (ESP); for futures options, it would be 

===== PDF PAGE 910 =====
850 
FIGURE 40-1. 
Delta comparison, with XYZ = 50. 
100 
75 
$ 
<ii 50 
0 ',, .. .......... 
Low-Volatility Stock , 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
25 ', ', High-Volatility Stock 
', ',, .............. 
---.............. 
0 L..L _______ .....L _______ __:::::i~~ ..... -..:L-_ 
40 45 50 
TABLE 40-1. 
55 
Strike Price 
60 65 
Delta comparison for different volatilities with XYZ = 50 and 
time = 3 months. 
Delta 
Strike Price Low-Volatility Stock High-Volatility Stock 
40 100 94 
45 93 78 
50 51 53 
55 11 29 
60 1 13 
65 0 5 
referred to as EFP (equivalent futures position). To differentiate between the two 
terms, the delta of the option is generally referred to as "option delta," while the ESP 
or EFP is called "position delta." Recall that the position delta is computed accord­
ing to the following simple equation: 
Position delta = Option's delta x Shares per option x Option quantity 

===== PDF PAGE 911 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-2. 
Delta comparison, with XYZ = 50. 
100 
75 
~ ai 50 
0 
25 
40 
TABLE 40-2. 
45 50 55 
Strike Price 
60 65 
Delta comparison - varying time remaining with XYZ = 50. 
Delta 
Strike Price t = 1 year t = 6 months 
40 92 97 
45 79 83 
50 61 57 
55 41 30 
60 25 12 
65 14 4 
851 
t = 3 months 
99 
90 
55 
18 
3 
0 
For futures options, the term "shares per option" would be replaced by "shares 
per contract," which is always 1. This is the risk measurement of how much market 
exposure the option position has. Whether called position delta, ESP, or EFP, one 
uses the deltas of the individual options in his portfolio to calculate the overall expo­
sure. By summing the calculations for each item in a position, or even in an entire 
option portfolio, one can approximate how much market exposure the entire option 

===== PDF PAGE 912 =====
852 
FIGURE 40-3. 
Delta as a function of time. 
57 
56 
55 
.s 
8 54 
53 
52 
TABLE 40-3. 
2 4 6 
Delta as a function of time. 
8 10 12 
Weeks Remaining 
Weeks Remaining 
20 
18 
15 
13 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
14 16 18 20 
Delta 
.566 
.562 
.557 
.553 
.547 
.543 
.538 
.531 
.521 
.515 
position has. The next example, reprinted from the chapter on mathematical appli­
cations, shows how one computes the net exposure of a complicated position. 
Example: The following position exists when XYZ is at 31. 75. It resembles a long 
straddle (or backspread), in that there is increased profit potential in either direction 

===== PDF PAGE 913 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 853 
if the stock moves far enough by expiration. Many market-makers and professional 
traders attempt to structure these types of positions, if possible, in order to take 
advantage of the sudden volatility that is inherent in today's markets. 
Position 
Position Delta Delta 
Short 4,500 XYZ 1.00 - 4,500 
Short 1 00 XYZ April 25 calls 0.89 - 8,900 
Long 50 XYZ April 30 calls 0.76 + 3,800 
Long 139 XYZ July 30 calls 0.74 + 10,286 
Total ESP: + 686 
This position, though complicated to the naked eye, reduces to being long only 
approximately 700 shares of XYZ. This is commonly referred to as being "delta long 
700 shares." Thus, the terms "delta," when referring to the sum of the deltas of a 
whole position, and "equivalent stock position" are synonymous. 
This position has some exposure to the market since it is delta long. If the posi­
tion delta were zero, it would be referred to as being delta neutral and would, theo­
retically, have no exposure to the market at that time. 
Note that one can derive some general characteristics of his delta by just exam­
ining his portfolio by eye: Short calls or long puts will introduce negative delta into 
the position; long calls or short puts will introduce positive delta. Furthermore, it is 
obvious that being long the underlying security adds to the long delta of the position, 
while being short the underlying security places more negative delta in the position. 
The use of this information to adjust the delta of one's position will be discussed in a 
later section of this chapter. 
Obviously, the delta of this entire position will change as the stock price moves 
up or down as time passes. The figure given is merely an instantaneous look at how 
the position is structured. It is the need to know how the position will change when 
other factors change that has led strategists to employ the following concepts. 
GAMMA 
Simply stated, the gamma is how fast the delta changes with respect to changes in the 
underlying stock price. It is known that the delta of a call increases as the call moves 
from out-of-the-money to in-the-money. The gamma is merely a precise measure­
ment of how fast the delta is increasing. 

===== PDF PAGE 914 =====
854 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Example: With XYZ at 49, assume the January 50 call has a delta of 0.50 and a 
gamma of 0.05. If XYZ moves up one point to 50, the delta of the call will increase 
by the amount of the gamma: It will increase from 0.50 to 0.55. 
As with the delta, the gamma can also be expressed as a percentage. But in this 
case, the increase or decrease applies to the delta. 
Example: Again, with XYZ at 49, assume the January 50 call has a delta of 0.50 and a 
gamma of 0.05. If XYZ moves up 2 points to 51, the delta of the call will increase by 
5% of the stock rrwve, because the gamma is 0.05, or 5 percent. Five percent of the 
stock move is 0.05 x 2, or 0.10. Thus, the delta will increase by 0.10, from 0.50 to 0.60. 
Obviously, the delta cannot keep increasing by 0.05 each time XYZ gains anoth­
er point in price, for it will eventually exceed 1.00 by that calculation, and it is known 
that the delta has a maximum of 1.00. Thus, it is obvious that the gamma changes. In 
general, the gamma is at its maximum point when the stock is near the strike of the 
option. As the stock moves away from the strike in either direction, the gamma 
decreases, approaching its minimum value of zero. 
Conceptually, this means that a deeply in-the-money or deeply out-of-the­
money option has a gamma of nearly zero. This makes sense - it implies that the delta 
of a deep in- or deep out-of-the-money option does not change very much at all, even 
if the stock moves by one point. 
Example: Assume XYZ is 25, and the January 50 call has a delta of virtually zero. If 
XYZ moves up one point to 26, the call is still so far out-of-the-money that the delta 
will still be zero. Thus, the gamma of this call is zero, since the delta does not change 
when the stock increases in price by a point. 
In a similar manner, the January 45 put on XYZ would have a delta of -1.0 with 
XYZ at 25. If XYZ moved up one point to 26, the put' s delta would not change; it is 
still so far in-the-money that it would still be - 1.0. Thus, the gamma of this deeply 
in-the-money option is also zero, since the delta remains unchanged in the face of a 
I-point rise in the underlying security. 
Note that the gamma of any option is expressed as a positive number, whether 
the option is a put or a call. 
Other properties of gamma are useful to know as well. As expiration nears, the 
gamma of at-the-money options increases dramatically. Consider an option with a day 
or two of life remaining. If it is at-the-money, the delta is approximately 0.50. 
However, if the stock were to move 2 points higher, the delta of the option would jump 

===== PDF PAGE 915 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 855 
to nearly 1.00 because of the short time remaining until expiration. Thus, the gamma 
would be roughly 0.25 (the delta increased by 0.50 when the stock moved 2 points), 
as compared to much smaller values of gamma for at-the-money options with several 
weeks or months of life remaining. The same 2-point rise in the underlying stock 
would not result in much of an increase in the delta of longer-term options at all. 
Out-of-the-money options display a different relationship between gamma and 
time remaining. An out-of-the-money option that is about to expire has a very small 
delta, and hence a very small gamma. However, if the out-of-the-money option has a 
significant amount of time remaining, then it will have a larger gamma than the 
option that is close to expiration. 
Figure 40-4 (see Table 40-4) depicts the gammas of three options with varying 
amounts of time remaining until expiration. The properties regarding the relation­
ship of gamma and time can be observed here. Notice that the short-term options 
have very low gammas deeply in- or out-of the-money, but have the highest gamma 
at-the-money (at 50). Conversely, the longest-term, one-year option has the highest 
gamma of the three time periods for deeply in- or out-of-the-money options. The 
data is presented in Table 40-4. This table contains a slight amount of additional data: 
the gamma for the at-the-money option at even shorter periods of time remaining 
until expiration. Notice how the gamma explodes as time decreases, for the at-the­
money option. With only one week remaining, the gamma is over 0.28, meaning that 
the delta of such a call would, for example, jump from 0.50 to 0.78 if the stock mere­
ly moved up from 50 to 51. 
Gamma is dependent on the volatility of the underlying security as well. At-the­
money options on less volatile securities will have higher gammas than similar options 
on more volatile securities. The following example demonstrates this fact. 
Example: Assume XYZ is at 49, as is ABC. Moreover, XYZ is a more volatile stock 
(30% implied) as compared to ABC (20% ). Then, similar options on the two stocks 
would have significantly different gammas. 
XYZ Gammas ABC Gammas 
Option (Volatility = 30%) (Volatility= 20%) 
January 50 .066 .097 
January 55 .045 .039 
January 60 .019 .0053 
February 50 .055 .081 
February 60 .024 .011 

===== PDF PAGE 916 =====
856 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatHity 
FIGURE 40-4. 
Gamma comparison, with XYZ = 50. 
8 
7 
0 6 0 ..-
X 5 
Cl! 
E 4 E 
Cl! 3 (!) 
2 t= 1 year 
t= 6 months 
t= 3 months 0 '-'----~---__._ ___ _._ ___ _._ ___ ....___ 
40 45 50 55 60 65 
Strike Price 
TABLE 40-4. 
Gamma comparison - various amounts of time remaining 
(with XYZ = 50). 
Time Remaining Strike Price 
40 45 50 55 60 
1 year .015 .029 .039 .04 .033 
6 months .011 .037 .058 .051 .030 
3 months .003 .039 .086 .057 .015 
2 months .108 
1 month .166 
1 week .288 
65 
.023 
.013 
.002 
Note that the at-the-money options (January 50's and February 50's) on ABC, 
the less volatile stock, have larger gammas than do their XYZ counterparts. However, 
look one strike higher (January 55's), and notice that the more volatile options have a 
slightly higher gamma. Look two strikes higher and the more volatile options have a 
vastly higher gamma, both for the January 60's and the February 60's. 
This concept makes sense if one thinks about the relationship between volatili­
ty and delta. On nonvolatile stocks, one finds that the delta of even a slightly in­
the-money option increases rapidly. This is because, since the stock is not volatile, 
buyers are not willing to pay much time premium for the option. As a result, the 
gamma is high as well, because as the stock moves into-the-money, the increase in 

===== PDF PAGE 917 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 857 
delta will be more dramatic than it would be for a volatile stock. Out-of-the-money 
options are an entirely different story. Since the nonvolatile stock will have difficulty 
moving fast enough to reach an out-of-the-money striking price, the delta of the out­
of-the-money option is small and it will not change quickly (that is, the gamma is 
small also). 
These concepts are summarized in Figure 40-5 (see Table 40-5), which depicts 
the gammas for similar options on stocks with differing volatilities. For the purposes 
of these graphs, XYZ is equal to 50 and there are three months remaining until expi­
ration. 
Notice that for a very volatile stock, the gamma is quite stable over nearly all 
striking prices when there are 3 months remaining until expiration. This means that 
the deltas of all options on such a volatile stock will be changing quite a bit for even 
a 1-point move in the underlying stock. This is an important point for neutral strate­
gists to note, because a position that starts out as delta neutral may quickly change if 
the underlying stock is very volatile. As this table implies, the deltas of the options in 
that "neutral" spread may be altered quickly, thereby rendering the spread quite un­
neutral. This concept will be discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. 
As delta was used to construct the equivalent stock position of an entire option 
position or portfolio, gamma can be used in a similar manner. An example of this fol­
lows, using the same securities from the preceding example on the delta of a posi­
tion. An important point to note is that the gamma of the underlying security itself is 
zero. This is true because the delta of the underlying security (which is always 1.0) 
never changes - hence the gamma is zero. The gamma is measuring the amount of 
change of the delta; if the delta of the underlying security never changes, the gamma 
of the underlying security must be zero. 
Example: The following position exists when XYZ is at 31.75. Recall that it resem­
bles a long straddle ( or backspread) in that there is increased profit potential in either 
direction if the stock moves far enough by expiration. In addition to the delta previ­
ously listed, the gamma is now shown as well. Note that since gamma is a small 
absolute number, it is sometimes calculated out to three or four decimal places. 
Option Position Option Position 
Position Delta Delta Gamma Gamma 
Short 4,500 XYZ 1.00 - 4,500 0.0000 0 
Short l 00 XYZ April 25 calls 0.89 - 8,900 0.0100 -100 
Long 50 XYZ April 30 calls 0.76 + 3,800 0.0300 +150 
Long 139 XYZ July 30 calls 0.74 +10,286 0.0200 +278 
Totals: + 686 +328 

===== PDF PAGE 918 =====
858 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 40-5. 
Gamma comparison, with XYZ = 50, t = three months. 
8 
7 
0 6 
0 
~ 5 
<ti 
E 4 E 
~ 3 
2 
TABLE 40-5. 
40 45 
Low Volatility 
Very High Volatility 
50 55 60 
Strike Price 
65 
Gamma comparison for varying volatilities (XYZ = 50, t = 3 
months). 
Gamma Very 
Strike Low Volatility High Volatility High Volatility 
40 .003 .013 .017 
45 .039 .039 .022 
50 .086 .057 .024 
55 .057 .049 .025 
60 .015 .028 .023 
65 .002 .012 .020 
As before, the position still has a delta long of almost 700 shares. In addition, 
one can now see that it has a positive gamma of over 300 shares. This means that the 
delta can be expected to change by 328 shares for each point that XYZ moves: If it 
moves up 1 point, the delta will increase to +1,014 (the current delta, 686, plus the 
gamma of 328). However, ifXYZ moves down by 1 point, then the delta will decrease 
to +358 (the current delta, 686, less the gamma of 328). 
Note that, in the above example, if XYZ continues higher, the gamma will 
remain positive (although it will eventually shrink some), and the delta will continue 
to increase. This means the position is getting longer and longer - a fact that makes 

===== PDF PAGE 919 =====
Chapter 40: Atlvanced Concepts 859 
sense when one notes that there are extra long calls and they would be getting deep­
er in-the-money as the stock moves up. Conversely, if XYZ continues to move lower, 
the delta will continue to decrease and will quickly become negative, meaning that 
the position would become short overall. Hence, the position does indeed resemble 
a long straddle: It gets longer as the market moves up and it gets shorter as the mar­
ket moves down. 
Long options, whether puts or calls, have positive gamma, while short options 
have negative gamma. Thus, a strategist with a position that has positive gamma has 
a net long option position and is generally hoping for large market movements. 
Conversely, if one has a position with negative gamma, it means he has shorted 
options and wants the market to remain fairly stable. 
Note that it is possible to be delta neutral, but to have a significant gamma. (For 
example, if one owns puts and calls with offsetting deltas, he would be delta neutral, 
but would have positive gamma since both options are long.) If one is delta neutral, 
he knows he has no market exposure at this time, but his gamma will show him what 
exposure his position will acquire as the market moves. These concepts will be dis­
cussed in greater detail later in this chapter. 
VEGA OR TAU 
There is no letter in the Greek alphabet called "vega." Thus, some strategists, being 
purists, prefer to use a real Greek letter, "tau," to refer to this risk measurement. The 
term "vega" will be used in this book, but the reader should note that "tau" means 
the same thing. Vega is the arrwunt by which the option price changes when the 
volatility changes. Vega is always expressed as a positive number, whether it refers to 
a put or a call. 
It is known that more volatile stocks have more expensive options. Thus, as 
volatility increases, the price of an option will rise. If volatility falls, the price of the 
option will fall as well. The vega is merely an attempt to quantify how much the 
option price will increase or decrease as the volatility moves, all other factors being 
equal. 
Before considering an example, a review of the term volatility is in order. 
Volatility is a measure of how quickly the underlying security moves around. 
Statistically, it is usually calculated as the standard deviation of stock prices over some 
period of time, generally annualized. This statistical measure is expressed as a per­
cent, although relating that percent to actual stock movements can be complicated. 
Suffice it to say that a stock that has a 50% volatility is more volatile than a stock with 
30% volatility. The stock market generally has a volatility of about 15% overall, 
although that may change from time to time (crashes, for example). 

===== PDF PAGE 920 =====
860 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Vo/atiHty 
Example: Again, assume XYZ is at 49, and the January 50 call is selling for 3.50. The 
vega of the option is 0.25, and the current volatility of XYZ is 30%. 
If the volatility increases by one percentage point or 1 % to 31 %, then the vega 
indicates that the option will increase in value by 0.25, to 3. 75. 
If the volatility had instead decreased by 1 percent to 29%, then the January 50 
call would have decreased to 3.25 (a loss of 0.25, the amount of the vega). 
If the implied volatility of an option increases, the option price will increase as 
well. Consequently, even though XYZ stock may be exhibiting the same historic 
movement that it always has, and therefore its (historical) volatility would be 
unchanged, if option buyers appear in sufficient quantity, they may drive the implied 
volatility ofXYZ's options higher. Likewise, an excess of option sellers could drive the 
implied volatility lower, even though the historical volatility does not change. So, it 
must be concluded that vega measures how much the option price changes as implied 
volatility changes. 
Vega is related to time. Figure 40-6 (see Table 40-6) shows the vegas for options 
with differing times remaining until expiration. The underlying stock is assumed to 
be 50 in all cases. Notice that the more time that remains, the higher the vega is. It 
is interesting to note that, for very long-term options, the vega of the slightly out-of­
the-money calls (strike = 55) is actually higher than that of the at-the-money. 
However, this discrepancy disappears as time passes. Not shown, but equally true, is 
that the vega of a slightly out-of-the-money option on a very volatile stock may be 
higher than that of the at-the-money. 
As with the measurements of risk discussed already, vega can refer to the option 
itself ("option vega") or to the position as a whole ("position vega"). Since vega is 
expressed as a positive number, if one is long options, then his position vega will be 
positive. This means he has exposure if volatilities decrease, or can make money if 
volatilities increase. 
Example: Again, assume that we have the same backspread position as before, with 
XYZ at 31.75. 
Option Position 
Position Vega Vega 
Short 4,500 XYZ 0.00 0 
Short 100 XYZ April 25 calls 0.02 - 200 
Long 50 XYZ April 30 calls 0.05 + 250 
Long 139 XYZ July 30 calls 0.07 + 973 
Total Vega: + 1,023 

===== PDF PAGE 921 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-6. 
Vega comparison, XYZ = 50. 
20 
18 
16 
14 
0 
0 12 ,--
.2S 10 C1l 
Cl 
~ 8 
6 t= 3 months 
4 
2 
0 
40 45 50 
Strike Price 
TABLE 40-6. 
861 
55 60 65 
Vega comparison for different time periods (with XYZ = 50). 
Vega 
Strike Price t = 1 Year t = 6 Months t = 3 Months 
40 0.12 0.06 0.02 
45 0.16 0.11 0.06 
50 0.19 0.13 0.09 
55 0.20 0.13 0.08 
60 0.18 0.11 0.05 
65 0.16 0.07 0.02 
The vega is a positive 10.23 points ($1,023 since each point for these equity 
options is worth $100). The fact that the position has a positive vega means that it is 
exposed to variations in volatility. If volatility decreases, the position will lose money: 
$1,023 for each one percentage point decrease in volatility. However, if volatility 
increases, the position will benefit. 
Vega is greatest for at-the-money options and approaches zero as the option is 
deeply in- or out-of-the-money. Again, this is common sense, since a deep in- or out-

===== PDF PAGE 922 =====
860 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Example: Again, assume XYZ is at 49, and the January 50 call is selling for 3.50. The 
vega of the option is 0.25, and the current volatility of XYZ is 30%. 
If the volatility increases by one percentage point or 1 % to 31 %, then the vega 
indicates that the option will increase in value by 0.25, to 3. 75. 
If the volatility had instead decreased by 1 percent to 29%, then the January 50 
call would have decreased to 3.25 (a loss of 0.25, the amount of the vega). 
If the implied volatility of an option increases, the option price will increase as 
well. Consequently, even though XYZ stock may be exhibiting the same historic 
movement that it always has, and therefore its (historical) volatility would be 
unchanged, if option buyers appear in sufficient quantity, they may drive the implied 
volatility of XYZ's options higher. Likewise, an excess of option sellers could drive the 
implied volatility lower, even though the historical volatility does not change. So, it 
must be concluded that vega measures how much the option price changes as implied 
volatility changes. 
Vega is related to time. Figure 40-6 (see Table 40-6) shows the vegas for options 
with differing times remaining until expiration. The underlying stock is assumed to 
be 50 in all cases. Notice that the more time that remains, the higher the vega is. It 
is interesting to note that, for very long-term options, the vega of the slightly out-of­
the-money calls (strike = 55) is actually higher than that of the at-the-money. 
However, this discrepancy disappears as time passes. Not shown, but equally true, is 
that the vega of a slightly out-of-the-money option on a very volatile stock may be 
higher than that of the at-the-money. 
As with the measurements of risk discussed already, vega can refer to the option 
itself ("option vega") or to the position as a whole ("position vega"). Since vega is 
expressed as a positive number, if one is long options, then his position vega will be 
positive. This means he has exposure if volatilities decrease, or can make money if 
volatilities increase. 
Example: Again, assume that we have the same backspread position as before, with 
XYZ at 31.75. 
Option Position 
Position Vega Vego 
Short 4,500 XYZ 0.00 0 
Short 100 XYZ April 25 calls 0.02 - 200 
Long 50 XYZ April 30 calls 0.05 + 250 
Long 139 XYZ July 30 calls 0.07 + 973 
Total Vega: + 1,023 

===== PDF PAGE 923 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-6. 
Vega comparison, XYZ = 50. 
20 
18 
16 
14 
0 
0 12 ... 
6 10 (13 
0) 
;g? 8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
40 45 
TABLE 40-6. 
861 
50 55 60 65 
Strike Price 
Vega comparison for different time periods (with XYZ = 50). 
Vega 
Strike Price t = 1 Year t = 6 Months t = 3 Months 
40 0.12 0.06 0.02 
45 0.16 0.11 0.06 
50 0.19 0.13 0.09 
55 0.20 0.13 0.08 
60 0.18 0.11 0.05 
65 0.16 0.07 0.02 
The vega is a positive 10.23 points ($1,023 since each point for these equity 
options is worth $100). The fact that the position has a positive vega means that it is 
exposed to variations in volatility. If volatility decreases, the position will lose money: 
$1,023 for each one percentage point decrease in volatility. However, if volatility 
increases, the position will benefit. 
Vega is greatest for at-the-money options and approaches zero as the option is 
deeply in- or out-of-the-money. Again, this is common sense, since a deep in- or out-

===== PDF PAGE 924 =====
862 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
of-the-money option will not be affected much by a change in volatility. In addition, 
for at-the-money options, longer-term options have a higher vega than short-term 
options. To verify this, think of it in the extreme: An at-the-money option with one 
day to expiration will not be overly affected by any change in volatility, due to its 
pending expiration. However, a three-month at-the-money option will certainly be 
sensitive to changes in volatility. 
Vega does not directly correlate with either delta or gamma. One could have a 
position with no delta and no gamma (delta neutral and gamma neutral) and still have 
exposure to volatility. This does not mean that such a position would be undesirable; 
it merely means that if one had such a position, he would have removed most of the 
market risk from his position and would be concerned only with volatility risk. 
In later sections, the use of volatility to establish positions and the use of vega 
to monitor them will be discussed. 
THETA 
Theta measures the time decay of a position. All option traders know that time is the 
enemy of the option holder, and it is the friend of the option writer. Theta is the name 
given to the risk measurement of time in one's position. Theta is generally expressed 
as a negative number, and it is expressed as the amount by which the option value 
will change. Thus, if an option has a theta of -0.12, that means the option will lose 
12 cents, or about an eighth of a point, per day. This is true for both puts and calls, 
although the theta of a put and a call with the same strike and expiration date are not 
equal to each other. 
Very long-term options are not subject to much time decay in one day's time. 
Thus, the theta of a long-term option is nearly zero. On the other hand, short-term 
options, especially at-the-money ones, have the largest absolute theta, since they are 
subject to the ravages of time on a daily basis. The theta of options on a highly volatile 
stock will be higher than the theta of options on a low-volatility stock. Obviously, the 
former options are more expensive (have more time value) and therefore have more 
time value to lose on a daily basis, thereby implying that they have a higher theta. 
Finally, the decay is not linear - an option will lose a greater percent of its daily value 
near the end of its life. 
Figure 40-7 (see Table 40-7) depicts the relationships of thetas for various strik­
ing prices and for differing volatilities on options with three months of life remain­
ing. Again, notice that for very volatile stocks, the out-of-the-money options have 
thetas as large as the at-the-moneys. This is saying that as each day passes, the prob­
ability of the stock reaching that out-of-the-money strike drops and causes the option 

===== PDF PAGE 925 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-7. 
Theta comparison, with XYZ = 50, t = three months. 
-16 
Very High Volatility 
-14 
-12 
0 0 
T"" 
X 
~ 
-10 
.i::: 
I-
-8 Low Volatility 
-6 
0 
40 45 50 55 60 
Strike Price 
TABLE 40-7. 
863 
65 
Theta comparison for differing volatilities (XYZ = 50, t = 3 months). 
Strike low Volatility Medium Volatility High Volatility 
40 -0.005 -0.008 -0.013 
45 -0.007 -0.010 -0.014 
50 -0.008 -0.010 -0.015 
55 -0.007 -0.010 -0.016 
60 -0.006 -0.009 -0.016 
65 -0.004 -0.008 -0.015 
to lose value. This does not change the fact that, for very short-term options, the theta 
is largest at-the-money. 
Normally, the theta of an individual option is of little interest to the strategist. 
He generally would be more concerned with delta or gamma. However, as with the 
other risk measures, theta can be computed for an entire portfolio of options. This 
measure, the "position theta," can be quite important because it gives the strategist 
a good idea of how much gain or loss he can expect on a daily basis, due to time ero­
sion. The following example demonstrates this point. Note that the underlying secu­
rity itself has a theta of zero, since it cannot lose any value due to time decay. 

===== PDF PAGE 926 =====
864 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Example: With XYZ at 49, the strategist has the following position in February, so 
that the April calls are nearer to expiration than the July calls. This position is similar 
to a large calendar spread position. 
Option Position 
Position Theta Theta 
Short 4,000 XYZ 0.00 0 
Short 150 XYZ April 50 calls -0.04 +600 
Long 150 XYZ April 30 calls -0.02 -300 
Short 78 XYZ July 30 puts -0.02 +156 
Total Theta: +456 
This position is expected to make $456 per day due to time decay. Note that 
short options, whether puts or calls, have a positive position theta, while long options 
have a negative position theta. A negative position theta means the position has risk 
due to time, while a positive position theta means time is working for the position. 
RHO 
Rho is the name given to the price change of an option's value due to a change in 
interest rates. Recall that one of the components that contributes to an option's price 
is interest rates. As interest rates rise, call prices will rise, but put prices will fall. The 
opposite is true as well: As interest rates fall, call prices decline and put prices rise. 
Rho measures the amount by which these prices rise or fall. 
This behavior of puts and calls with respect to interest rates may not be imme­
diately obvious, but recall that the arbitrage that can be established with in-the­
money calls (the "interest play," discussed in Chapter 27 on arbitrage) demonstrates 
that arbitrageurs are willing to pay more for an in-the-money call as interest rates rise 
because they will be earning more interest on the stock that they sell short against 
that in-the-money call. Thus, rising interest rates cause call prices to increase. 
The opposite is true for puts: Rising interest rates cause put prices to decline. 
Again, an arbitrage can be used to demonstrate the point. Recall that in a reversal 
arbitrage, the arbitrageur is selling the stock and the put while buying the call. We 
have just demonstrated that, as interest rates rise, he is willing to pay more for the 
call since he can earn extra interest on the short sale of his stock. This automatically 
means that he will be willing to sell the put for less. 
Rho is expressed as a positive number for calls and a negative one for puts. Rho 
is smallest for deeply out-of-the-money options and is large for deeply-in-the-money 
options. It is larger for longer-tenn options and is nearly zero for very short-tenn 

===== PDF PAGE 927 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 865 
options. The following table of option prices may help to demonstrate these rela­
tionships: 
Example: With XYZ at 49, the following options have the rho indicated (January is 
the near-term expiration): 
Month/Strike Call Rho Put Rho 
January 35 0.05 -0.01 
January 50 0.03 -0.03 
January 60 0.00 -0.05 
July 35 0.18 -0.02 
July 50 0.14 -0.15 
July 60 0.07 -0.18 
Note that the in-the-money calls (35 strike) have larger rho than the out-of-the­
money 60's, in both January and July. Similarly, the in-the-money puts (the 60's) have 
larger rho on an absolute basis than the out-of-the-money 35's. Again, this is true for 
both January and July. 
Furthermore, note that the longer-term July rhos are all larger (again as 
absolute numbers) than their shorter-term January counterparts. 
Rho can also be calculated for an entire portfolio to obtain a "position rho," sim­
ilar to previous examples. Generally, one would not be overly concerned with his 
position rho unless his portfolio contained quite a few long-term options and/or 
deeply in-the-money ones. Thus, rho is more important as a consideration when one 
is trading LEAPS or warrants, both of which may be extremely long-term vehicles. 
Of the risk measures discussed so far, rho is the least used, since many traders tend 
to have relatively short-term options in their positions. 
THE GA,\1MA OF THE GAMMA 
Occasionally, one may hear reference to the "six measures of risk." This is the sixth 
one and it is the most arcane. At any point, one knows the delta and gamma of an 
option. As the stock moves, the delta changes (by the amount of the gamma), but so 
does the gamma. Some traders are interested in knowing how much the gamma will 
change when the stock moves. Hence, they will compute the gamma of the gamma, 
which is the arrwunt by which the gamma will change when the stock price changes. 
This concept will be discussed at the end of this chapter. It is most important for 
strategists involved in positions on highly volatile stocks, for if the stock moves far 

===== PDF PAGE 928 =====
866 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatOity 
enough, the gamma (and therefore the delta) may change dramatically. Thus, one 
might want to know how this risk measure affects his profitability. 
SUMMARY 
Delta: Positive delta indicates that a position is currently bullish; if the underly­
ing security goes up in price, the position should make money. A negative 
delta indicates a bearish slant. 
Gamma: Positive gamma means that the delta will increase if the underlying secu­
rity rises in price. Positive gamma generally implies that there is a pre­
ponderance of long options in the position, either puts or calls; negative 
gamma indicates written or naked options in the position. 
Theta: Negative theta means that the position will lose money as time passes 
(typical of positions with long options); positive theta implies that time is 
working for the position (positions with written options). 
Vega: Positive vega means that an increase of (perceived) volatility will benefit 
the position - usually true of positions with long options in them; nega­
tive vega means that a decrease of volatility would be beneficial. 
STRATEGY CONSIDERATIONS: USING THE 
11
GREEKS" 
Before looking at how one operates a particular strategy using delta, gamma, etc., it 
might be beneficial to see how these factors relate to the individual strategies that 
have been described throughout this book. Table 40-8 is a general guide to how the 
various strategies are exposed to various market factors. It is not an all-purpose or 
specific table, because as the stock moves higher or lower, some of the risk measure­
ment factors will certainly be affected. 
A few assumptions were made in constructing the table. First, it was assumed 
that the strategies where delta is noted as being zero are established in a neutral 
stance. The bull spread and bear spread strategies assumed that the stock was mid­
way between the striking prices. Two other spread strategies - ratio call and ratio put 
- assumed the stock was at the striking price of the option that was sold. In all other 
cases, there is only one striking price involved, and it was assumed that the stock was 
at the strike. 
The table may help to clarify some of the concepts concerning the risk meas­
urement factors. First, notice that stock or futures - or any underlying security- have 
only delta. None of the other factors pertains to the underlying security itself. 

===== PDF PAGE 929 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 867 
TABLE 40·8. 
General risk exposure of common strategies. 
Strategy Delta Gamma Theta Vega RHo 
Buy stock + 0 0 0 0 
Sell stock short 0 0 0 0 
Call buy + + + + 
Put buy + + 
Straddle buy 0 + + + 
Covered write + + 
Naked call sale + 
Naked put sale + + + 
Ratio write 
(straddle sale) 0 + 
Calendar spread 0 + + 
Bull spread + + 
Bear spread + 
Ratio call spread 0 + 
Ratio put spread 0 + + 
As might be expected, spread strategies involving both long and short options are 
less easily quantified than outright buys or sells. The calendar spread strategy is one 
in which the spreader does not want a lot of stock movement - he would prefer the 
underlying security to remain near the striking price, for that is the area of maximum 
profit potential. This is reflected by the fact that gamma is negative. Also, for calendar 
spreads, the passage of time is good, a fact that is reflected by the fact that theta is pos­
itive. Finally, since an increase in implied volatilities or interest rates would boost 
prices and widen the spread (creating a profit), vega is positive and rho is negative. 
A bull spread has positive delta, reflecting the bullish nature of the spread, but 
it has negative gamma. The reason gamma is negative is that the position becomes 
less bullish as the underlying security rises, since the profit potential, and hence the 
bullishness of the position, is limited. For similar reasons, a bear spread has negative 
delta (reflecting bearishness) and negative gamma (reflecting limited bearishness). 
Both the bull spread and the bear spread are the same with respect to the other risk 
measurements: Theta is negative, reflecting the fact that time decay can hurt the 
spread. Less obvious is the fact that these spreads are hurt by an increase in per­
ceived volatility; a negative vega tells us this is true, however. 
These risk measurement tools are important in that they can quite graphically 
depict the risk and reward characteristics of an option position or option portfolio. 

===== PDF PAGE 930 =====
868 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
They are useful in establishing a new position, because one can see how much expo­
sure he is taking on. In addition, they are extremely useful for follow-up action, since 
one can see how his position's characteristics have developed in the current market­
place at the present time. In the following sections, the use of the risk measurement 
tools as aids in establishing a position or in following up on a position will be dis­
cussed in detail. 
DELTA NEUTRAL 
One popular type of neutral position is to be delta neutral - that is, to have the equiv­
alent stock position (ESP) or equivalent futures position (EFP) be zero. A delta neu­
tral position is one in which the sum of the projected price changes of the long options 
in the spread is essentially offset by the projected price changes of the short options 
in the same spread. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 50. The following three options are trading with the 
prices and deltas indicated. Furthermore, the "theoretical value" of each option is 
shown: 
XYZ:50 
"Theoretical 
Option Price Delta Value" 
January 50 call 3.00 0.55 3.50 
January 55 call 1.50 0.35 1.48 
February 50 put 3.50 -0.40 3.44 
Assuming that one can rely upon these "theoretical values" (a big assumption, 
by the way), it is obvious that the January 50 call is cheap with respect to the other 
options: They are close to their values, while the January 50 is 50 cents under. The 
neutral strategist would want to buy the January 50 call and hedge his purchase with 
one of the other two options presented. One choice would be to establish a spread 
wherein the January 50 calls are bought and a number of January 55's are sold. To 
determine how many are to be bought and sold, one merely has to divide the deltas 
of the two options: 
Delta neutral spread ratio = 0.55/0.35 = 11-to-7 
Thus, a delta neutral ratio spread would consist of buying 7 January 50's and sell­
ing 11 January 55's. To verify that this spread is neutral with respect to the change in 
price ofXYZ, notice that ifXYZ moves up in price 1 point, the January 50 will increase 

===== PDF PAGE 931 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 869 
in price by 0.55; so seven of them will increase by 7 x 0.55, or 3.85 points total. 
Similarly, the January 55 will increase in price by 0.35, so eleven of them would 
increase in price by 11 x 0.35, or 3.85 points total. Hence, the long side of the spread 
would profit by 3.85 points, while the short side loses 3.85 points - a neutral situation. 
The resulting position is a ratio spread. The profitability of the spread occurs 
between about 51 and 62 at expiration as shown in Figure 40-8, but that is not the 
major point. The real attractiveness of the spread to the neutral trader is that if the 
underpriced nature of the January 50 call (vis-a-vis the January 55 call) should dis­
appear, the spread should produce a profit, regardless of the short-term market 
movement of XYZ. The spread could then be closed if this should occur. 
To illustrate this fact, suppose that XYZ actually falls to 49, but the January 50 
call returns to "fair value": 
XYZ: 49 
"Theoretical 
Option Price Delta Value" 
January 50 call 3.00 0.52 3.00 
January 55 call 1.10 0.34 1.13 
February 50 put 3.90 -0.42 3.84 
Notice that the theoretical values in this table are equal to the theoretical val­
ues from the previous table, less the amount of the delta. Since the XYZ January 50 
call is no longer underpriced, the position would be removed, and the strategist 
would make nothing on his January 50's, but would make .40 on each of the eleven 
short January 55's, for a profit of $440 less commissions. 
This example leans heavily on the assumption that one is able to accurately esti­
mate the theoretical value and delta of the options. In real life, this chore can be 
quite difficult, since the estimate requires one to define the future volatility of the 
common stock. This is not easy. However, for the purposes of a spread, the ratio of 
the two deltas is used. Moreover, the example didn't require that one know the exact 
theoretical value of each option; rather, the only knowledge that was required was 
that one of the options was cheap with respect to the other options. 
As an alternative to a ratio spread, another type of delta neutral position could 
be established from the previous data: Buy the January 50 call (this is the basis of the 
position since it is supposedly the cheap option) and buy the February 50 put - the 
only other choice from the data given. This position is a long straddle of sorts. Recall 
that the delta of a put is negative; so again, the delta neutral ratio can be calculated 
by dividing the absolute value of two deltas: 
Delta neutral straddle ratio= 0.55/1-0.401 = 11-to-8 

===== PDF PAGE 932 =====
870 
FIGURE 40-8. 
XYZ ratio spread. 
f/) 
f/) 
3000 
2000 
.3 1000 
~ 
e a.. 
(r.> 
40 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
45 55 60 
At Expiration 
Stock Price 
Thus, a delta neutral straddle position would consist of buying 8 J anua:ry 50 calls 
and buying 11 Februa:ry 50 puts. The straddle has no market exposure, at least over 
the short term. Note that the delta neutral straddle has a significantly different prof­
it picture from the delta neutral ratio spread, but they are both neutral and are both 
based on the fact that the Janua:ry 50 call is cheap. The straddle makes money if the 
stock moves a lot, while the other makes money if the stock moves only a little. (See 
Figure 40-9.) 
Can these two vastly different profit pictures be depicting strategies in which 
the same thing is to be accomplished ( that is, to capture the underpriced nature of 
the XYZ Janua:ry 50 call)? Yes, but in order to decide which strategy is "best," the 
strategist would have to take other factors into consideration: the historical volatility 
of the underlying security, for example, or how much actual time remains until 
Janua:ry expiration, as well as his own psychological attitude toward selling uncovered 
calls. A more precise definition of the other risks of these two positions can be 
obtained by looking at their position gammas. 
Delta Neutral Is Not Entirely Neutral. In fact, delta neutral means that 
one is neutral only with respect to small price changes in the underlying securi­
ty. A delta neutral position may have seriously unneutral characteristics when 

===== PDF PAGE 933 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-9. 
XYZ straddle buy. 
Cl) 
8000 
7000 
6000 
5000 
4000 
~ 3000 
~ 2000 
! 1000 
01------------------------
-1000 
-2000 
-3000 At January Expiration 
Stock Price 
871 
some of the other risk measurements are considered. Consequently, one cannot 
blithely go around establishing delta neutral positions and ignoring them, for 
they may have significant market risk as certain factors change. 
For example, it is obvious to the naked eye that the two positions described in 
the previous section - the ratio spread and the long straddle - are not alike at all, 
but both are delta neutral. If one incorporates the usage of some of the other risk 
measurements into his position, he will be able to quantify the differences between 
"neutral" strategies. The sale of a straddle will be used to examine how these vari­
ous factors work. 
Positions with naked options in them have negative position gamma. This 
means that as the underlying security moves, the position will acquire traits opposite 
to that movement: If the security rises, the position becomes short; if it falls, the posi­
tion becomes long. This description generally fits any position with naked options, 
such as a ratio spread, a naked straddle, or a ratio write. 
Example: XYZ is at 88. There are three months remaining until July expiration, and 
the volatility of XYZ is 30%. Suppose 100 July 90 straddles are sold for 10 points -
the put and the call each selling for 5. Initially, this position is nearly delta neutral, as 

===== PDF PAGE 934 =====
872 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
shown in Table 40-9. However, since both options are sold, each sale places negative 
gamma in the position. 
The usefulness of calculating gamma is shown by this example. The initial posi­
tion is NET short only 100 shares of XYZ, a very small delta. In fact, a person who is 
a trader of small amounts of stock might actually be induced into believing that he 
could sell these 100 straddles, because that is equivalent to being short merely 100 
shares of the stock. 
TABLE 40-9. 
Position delta and gamma of straddle sale. XYZ = 88. 
Option Position Option Position 
Position Delto Delta Gamma Gamma 
Sell l 00 July 90 calls 0.505 -5,050 0.03 -300 
Sell 1 00 July 90 puts 0.495 +4,950 0.03 -300 
Total shares - 100 -600 
Calculating the gamma quickly dispels those notions. The gamma is large: 600 
shares of negative gamma. Hence, if the stock moves only 2 points lower, this trad­
er's straddle position can be expected to behave as if it were now long 1,100 shares 
(the original 100 shares short plus 1,200 that the gamma tells us we can expect to get 
long)! The position might look like this after the stock drops 2 points: 
XYZ: 86 
Position 
Sold 1 00 July 90 calls 
Sold 100 July 90 puts 
Option 
Delta 
0.44 
0.55 
Position 
Delta 
-4,400 
+5,500 
+ 1 , 100 shares 
Hence, a 2-point drop in the stock means that the position is already acquiring 
a "long" look. Further drops will cause the position to become even "longer." This is 
certainly not a position - being short 100 straddles - for a small trader to be in, even 
though it might have erroneously appeared that way when one observed only the 
delta of the position. Paying attention to gamma more fully discloses the real risks. 
In a similar manner, if the stock had risen 2 points to 90, the position would 
quickly have become delta short. In fact, one could expect it to be short 1,300 shares 
in that case: the original short 100 shares plus the 1,200 indicated by the negative 
gamma. A rise to 90, then, would make the position look like this: 

===== PDF PAGE 935 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
XYZ:90 
Position 
Sold 100 July 90 calls 
Sold 1 00 July 90 puts 
Option 
Delto 
0.56 
0.43 
Position 
Delta 
-5,600 
+4,300 
873 
1,300 shares 
These examples demonstrate how quickly a large position, such as being short 
100 straddles, can acquire a large delta as the stock moves even a small distance. 
Extrapolating the moves is not completely correct, because the gamma changes as 
the stock price changes, but it can give the trader some feel for how much his delta 
will change. 
It is often useful to calculate this information in advance, to some point in the 
near future. Figure 40-10 depicts what the delta of this large short straddle position 
will be, two weeks after it was first sold. The points on the horizontal axis are stock 
prices. The quickness with which the neutrality of the position disappears is alarm­
ing. A small move up to 93 - only one standard deviation - in two weeks makes the 
overall position short the equivalent of about 3,300 shares of XYZ. Figure 40-10 real­
ly shows nothing more than the effect that gamma is having on the position, but it is 
presented in a form that may be preferable for some traders. 
What this means is that the position is "fighting" the market: As the market goes 
up, this position becomes shorter and shorter. That can be an unpleasant situation, 
both from the point of view of creating unrealized losses as well as from a psycho­
logical viewpoint. The position delta and gamma can be used to estimate the amount 
of unrealized loss that will occur: Just how much can this position be expected to lose 
if there is a quick move in the underlying stock? The answer is quickly obtained from 
the delta and gamma: With the first point that XYZ moves, from 88 to 89, the posi­
tion acts as if it is short 100 shares (the position delta), so it would lose $100. With 
the next point that XYZ rises, from 89 to 90, the position will act as if it is short the 
original 100 shares (the position delta), plus another 600 shares (the position 
gamma). Hence, during that second point of movement by XYZ, the entire position 
will act as if it is short 700 shares, and therefore lose another $700. Therefore, an 
immediate 2-point jump in XYZ will cause an unrealized loss of $800 in the position. 
Summarizing: 
Loss, first point of stock movement = position delta 
Loss, second point of stock movement = position delta + gamma 
Total loss for 2 points of stock movement 
= 2 x position delta + position gamma 

===== PDF PAGE 936 =====
874 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
FIGURE 40· 1 O. 
Proiected delta, in 14 days. 
6000 
4500 
3000 
Cl) 1500 ~ ro .c 
(/) 
0 'E 
(1) 
80 85 ~ ·5 -1500 
95 
XYZ Stock Price 
C" 
UJ 
-3000 
-4500 
Using the example data: 
Loss, XYZ moves from 88 to 89: -$100 (the position delta) 
Loss, XYZ moves from 89 to 90: -$100 (delta) - $600 (gamma) 
: -$700 
Total loss, XYZ moves from 88 to 90: -$100 x 2 - $600 = -$800 
This can be verified by looking at the prices of the call and put after XYZ has jumped 
from 88 to 90. One could use a model to calculate expected prices if that happened. 
However, there is another way. Consider the following statements: 
If the stock goes up by 1 point, the call will then have a price of: 
p 1 = Po + delta 
5.505 = 5.00 + 0.505 (if XYZ goes to 89 in the example) 
If the stock goes up 2 points, the call will have an increase of the above amount 
plus a similar increase for the next point of stock movement. The delta for that sec­
ond point of stock movement is the original delta plus the gamma, since gamma tells 
one how much his delta is going to change. 

===== PDF PAGE 937 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
p2 = p 1 +delta+ gamma, or substituting from above 
p2 = (p0 + delta) + delta + gamma 
= Po + 2 x delta + gamma 
6.04 = 5.00 + 2 x 0.505 + 0.03 (in the example if XYZ = 90) 
875 
By the same calculation, the put in the example will be priced at 4.04 if XYZ imme­
diately jumps to 90: 
4.04 = 5.00 - 2 X 0.495 + 0.03 
So, overall, the call will have increased by 1.04, but the put will only have 
decreased by 0.96. The unrealized loss would then be computed as -$10,400 for the 
100 calls, offset by a gain of $9,600 on the sale of 100 puts, for a net unrealized loss 
of $800. This verifies the result obtained above using position delta and position 
gamma. Again, this confirms the logical fact that a quick stock movement will cause 
unrealized losses in a short straddle position. 
Continuing on, let us look at some of the other factors affecting the sale of this 
straddle. The straddle seller has time working in his favor. After the position is estab­
lished, there will not be as much decay in the first two-week period as there will be 
when expiration draws near. The exact amount of time decay to expect can be calcu­
lated from the theta of the position: 
XYZ: 88 
Position 
Sold l 00 July 90 calls 
Sold l 00 July 90 puts 
Option 
Theta 
-0.03 
-0.03 
Position 
Theta 
+$300 
+$300 
+$600 
This is how the position looked with respect to time decay when it was first 
established (XYZ at 88 and three months remaining until expiration). The theta of the 
put and the call are essentially the same, and indicate that each option is losing about 
3 cents of value each day. Note that the theta is expressed as a negative number, and 
since these options are sold, the position theta is a positive number. A positive posi­
tion theta means time decay is working in your favor. One could expect to make $300 
per day from the sale of the 100 calls. He could expect to make another $300 per day 
from the sale of the 100 puts. Thus, his overall position is generating a theoretical 
profit from time decay of $600 per day. 
The fact that the sale of a straddle generates profits from time decay is not 
earth-shattering. That is a well-known fact. However, the amount of that time decay 

===== PDF PAGE 938 =====
876 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
is quantified by using theta. Furthermore, it serves to show that this position, which 
is delta neutral, is not neutral with respect to the passage of time. 
Finally, let us examine the position with respect to changes in volatility. This is 
done by calculating the position vega. 
XYZ:88 
Position 
Sold 1 00 July 90 calls 
Sold 100 July 90 puts 
Option 
Vega 
0.18 
0.18 
Position 
Vega 
-$1,800 
-$1,800 
-$3,600 
Again, this information is displayed at the time the position was established, 
three months to expiration, and with a volatility of 30% for XYZ. The vega is quite 
large. The fact that the call's vega is 0.18 means that the call price is expected to 
increase by 18 cents if the implied volatility of the option increases by one percent­
age point, from 30% to 31 %. Since the position is short 100 calls, an increase of 18 
cents in the price of the call would translate into a loss of $1,800. The put has a sim­
ilar vega, so the overall position would lose $3,600 if the options trade with an 
increase in volatility of just one percentage point. Of course, the position would make 
$3,600 if the volatility decreased by one percentage point, to 29%. 
This volatility risk, then, is the greatest risk in this short straddle position. As 
before, it is obvious that an increase in volatility is not good for a position with naked 
options in it. The use of vega quantifies this risk and shows how important it is to 
attempt to sell overpriced options when establishing such positions. One should not 
adhere to any one strategy all the time. For example, one should not always be sell­
ing naked puts. If the implied volatilities of these puts are below historical norms, 
such a strategy is much more likely to encounter the risk represented by the posi­
tion vega. There have been several times in the recent past - mostly during market 
crashes - when the implied volatilities of both index and equity options have leaped 
tremendously. Those times were not kind to sellers of options. However, in almost 
every case, the implied volatility of index options was quite low before the crash 
occurred. Thus, any trader who was examining his vega risk would not have been 
inclined to sell naked options when they were historically "cheap." 
In summary then, this "neutral" position is, in reality, much more complex when 
one considers all the other factors. 

===== PDF PAGE 939 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
Position summary 
Risk Factor 
Position delta = l 00 
Position gamma = -600 
Position theta = +$600 
Position vega = -$3,600 
877 
Comment 
Neutral; no immediate exposure to small 
market movements; lose $100 for 1 
point move in underlying. 
Fairly negative; position will react 
inversely to market movements, causing 
losses of $700 for second point of 
movement by underlying. 
Favorable; the passage of time works in the 
position's favor. 
Very negative; position is extremely 
subject to changes in implied volatility. 
This straddle sale has only one thing guaranteed to work for it initially: time 
decay. (The risk factors will change as price, time, and volatility change.) Stock price 
movements will not be helpful, and there will always be stock price movements, so 
one can expect to feel the negative effect of those price changes. Volatility is the big 
unknown. If it decreases, the straddle seller will profit handsomely. Realistically, 
however, it can only decrease by a limited amount. If it increases, very bad things will 
happen to the profitability of the position. Even worse, if the implied volatility is 
increasing, there is a fairly likely chance that the underlying stock will be jumping 
around quite a bit as well. That isn't good either. Thus, it is imperative that the strad­
dle seller engage in the strategy only when there is a reasonable expectation that 
volatilities are high and can be expected to decrease. If there is significant danger of 
the opposite occurring, the strategy should be avoided. 
If volatility remains relatively stable, one can anticipate what effects the passage 
of time will have on the position. The delta will not change much, since the options 
are nearly at-the-money. However, the gamma will increase, indicating that nearer to 
expiration, short-term price movements will have more exaggerated effects on the 
unrealized profits of the position. The theta will grow even more, indicating that time 
will be an even better friend for the straddle writer. Shorter-term options tend to 
decay at a faster rate than do longer-term ones. Finally, the vega will decrease some 
as well, so that the effect of an increase in implied volatility alone will not be as dam­
aging to the position when there is significantly less time remaining. So, the passage 

===== PDF PAGE 940 =====
878 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
of time generally will improve most aspects of this naked straddle sale. However, that 
does not mitigate the current situation, nor does it imply that there will be no risk if 
a little time passes. 
The type of analysis shown in the preceding examples gives a much more in­
depth look than merely envisioning the straddle sale as being delta short 100 shares 
or looking at how the position will do at expiration. In the previous example, it is 
known that the straddle writer will profit if XYZ is between 80 and 100 in three 
months, at expiration. However, what might happen in the interim is another matter 
entirely. The delta, gamma, theta, and vega are useful for the purpose of defining 
how the position will behave or misbehave at the current point in time. 
Refer back to the table of strategies at the beginning of this section. Notice that 
ratio writing or straddle selling ( they are equivalent strategies) have the characteris­
tics that have been described in detail: Delta is 0, and several other factors are neg­
ative. It has been shown how those negative factors translate into potential profits or 
losses. Observing other lines in the same table, note that covered writing and naked 
put selling ( they are also equivalent, don't forget) have a description very similar to 
straddle selling: Delta is positive, and the other factors are negative. This is a worse 
situation than selling naked straddles, for it entails all the same risks, but in addition 
will suffer losses on immediate downward moves by the underlying stock. The point 
to be made here is that if one felt that straddle selling is not a particularly attractive 
strategy after he had observed these examples, he then should feel even less inclined 
to do covered writing, for it has all the same risk factors and isn't even delta neutral. 
An example that was given in the chapter on futures options trading will be 
e,,'Panded as promised at this time. To review, one may often find volatility skewing 
in futures options, but it was noted that one should not normally buy an at-the-money 
call (the cheapest one) and sell a large quantity of out-of-the-money calls just because 
that looks like the biggest theoretical advantage. The following example was given. It 
will now be expanded to include the concept of gamma. 
Example: Heavy volatility skewing exists in the prices of January soybean options: 
The out-of-the-money calls are much more expensive than the at-the-money calls. 
The following data is known: 
January soybeans: 583 
Option Price Implied Volatility Delta Gamma 
575 call 19.50 15% 0.55 .0100 
675 call 2.25 23% 0.09 .0026 

===== PDF PAGE 941 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
Using deltas, the following spread appears to be neutral: 
Buy l January bean 57 5 call at 19 .50 
Sell 6 January bean 675 calls at 2.25 
Net position: 
19.50 DB 
13.50 CR 
6 Debit 
879 
At the time the original example was presented, it was demonstrated through 
the use of the profit picture that the ratio was too steep and problems could result in 
a large rally. 
Now that one has the concept of gamma at his disposal, he can quantify what 
those problems are. 
The position gamma of this spread is quite negative: 
Position gamma = .01 - 6 x .0026 = -0.0056 
That is, for every 10 points that January soybeans rally, the position will become 
short about 1/2 of one futures contract. The maximum profit point, 675, is 92 points 
above the current price of 583. While beans would not normally rally 92 points in 
only a few days, it does demonstrate that this position could become very short if 
beans quickly rallied to the point of maximum profit potential. Rest assured there 
would be no profit if that happened. 
Even a small rally of 20 cents (points) in soybeans - less than the daily limit -
would begin to make this tiny spread noticeably short. If one had established the 
spread in some quantity, say buying 100 and selling 600, he could become seriously 
short very fast. 
A neutral spreader would not use such a large ratio in this spread. Rather, he 
would neutralize the gamma and then attempt to deal with the resulting delta. The 
next section deals with ways to accomplish that. 
CREATING MULTIFACETED NEUTRALITY 
So what is the strategist to do? He can attempt to construct positions that are neutral 
with respect to the other factors if he perceives them as a risk. There is no reason why 
a position cannot be constructed as veg a neutral rather than delta neutral, if he wants 
to eliminate the risk of volatility increases or decreases. Or, maybe he wants to elim­
inate the risk of stock price movements, in which case he would attempt to be gamma 
neutral as well as delta neutral. 
This seems like a simple concept until one first attempts to establish a position 
that is neutral with respect to more than one risk variable. For example, if one is 

===== PDF PAGE 942 =====
880 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatiRty 
attempting to create a spread that is neutral with respect to both gamma and delta, 
he could attempt it in the following way: 
Example: XYZ is 60. A spreader wants to establish a spread that is neutral with 
respect to both gamma and delta, using the following prices: 
Option 
October 60 call 
October 70 call 
Delta 
0.60 
0.25 
Gamma 
0.050 
0.025 
The secret to determining a spread that is neutral with respect to both risk meas­
ures is to neutralize gamma first, for delta can always be neutralized by taking an off­
setting position in the underlying security, whether it be stock or futures. First, deter­
mine a gamma neutral spread by dividing the two gammas: 
Gamma neutral ratio= 0.050/0.025 = 2-to-l 
So, buying one October 60 and selling two October 70 calls would be a gamma 
neutral spread. Now, the position delta of that spread is computed: 
Position 
Long 1 October 60 call 
Short 2 October 70 calls 
Net position delta: 
Delta 
0.60 
0.25 
Position Delta 
+60 shares 
-50 shares 
+ 10 shares 
Hence, this gamma neutral ratio is making the position delta long by 10 shares 
of stock for each l-by-2 spread that is established. For example, if one bought 100 
October 60 calls and sold 200 October 70 calls, his position delta would be long 1,000 
shares. 
This position delta is easily neutralized by selling short 1,000 shares of the stock. 
The resulting position is both gamma neutral and delta neutral: 
Option Position Option Position 
Position Delta Delta Gamma Gamma 
Short 1,000 XYZ 1.00 -1,000 0 0 
Long 1 00 October 60 calls 0.60 +6,000 0.050 + 500 
Short 200 October 70 calls 0.25 -5,000 0.025 - 500 
Net Position: 0 0 

===== PDF PAGE 943 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 881 
Hence, it is always a simple matter to create a position that is both gamma and delta 
neutral. In fact, it is just as simple to create a position that is neutral with respect to 
delta and any other risk measure, because all that is necessary is to create a neutral 
ratio of the other risk measure (gamma, vega, theta, etc.) and then eliminate the 
resulting position delta by using the underlying. 
In theory, one could construct a position that was neutral with respect to all five 
risk measures (or six, if you really want to go overboard and include "gamma of the 
gamma" as well). Of course, there wouldn't be much profit potential in such a posi­
tion, either. But such constructions are actually employed, or at least attempted, by 
traders such as market-makers who try to make their profits from the difference 
between the bid and off er of an option quote, and not from assuming market risk 
Still, the concept of being neutral with respect to more than one risk factor is a 
valid one. In fact, if a strategist can determine what he is really attempting to accom­
plish, he can often negate other factors and construct a position designed to accom­
plish exactly what he wants. Suppose that one thought the implied volatility of a cer­
tain set of options was too high. He could just sell straddles and attempt to capture 
that volatility. However, he is then exposed to movements by the underlying stock He 
would be better served to construct a position with negative vega to reflect his expec­
tation on volatility, but then also have the position be delta neutral and gamma 
neutral, so that there would be little risk to the position from market movements. This 
can normally be done quite easily. An example will demonstrate how. 
Example: XYZ is 48. There are three months to expiration, and the volatility of XYZ 
and its options is 35%. The following information is also known: 
XYZ:48 
Option Price Delta Gamma Vega 
April 50 call 2.50 0.47 0.045 0.08 
April 60 call l.00 0.17 0.026 0.06 
For whatever reasons - perhaps the historical volatility is much lower - the 
strategist decides that he wants to sell volatility. That is, he wants to have a negative 
position vega so that when the volatility decreases, he will make money. This can 
probably be accomplished by buying some April 50 calls and selling more April 60 
calls. However, he does not want any risk of price movement, so some analysis must 
be done. 
First, he should determine a gamma neutral spread. This is done in much the 
same manner as determining a delta neutral spread, except that gamma is used. 

===== PDF PAGE 944 =====
882 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatmty 
Merely divide the two gammas to determine the neutral ratio to be used. In this case, 
assume that the April 50 call and the April 60 call are to be used: 
Gamma neutral ratio: 0.045/0.026 = 1.73-to-l 
Thus, a gamma neutral position would be created by buying 100 April 50's and sell­
ing 173 April 60's. Alternatively, buying 10 and selling 17 would be close to gamma 
neutral as well. The larger position will be used for the remainder of this example. 
Now that this ratio has been chosen, what is the effect on delta and vega? 
Option Position Option Position Option Position 
Position Delta Delta Gamma Gamma Vega Vega 
Long 1 00 April 50 0.47 +4,700 0.045 +450 0.08 + $800 
Short 173 April 60 0.17 -2,941 0.026 -450 0.06 -1,038 
Total: + 1,759 0 - $238 
The position delta is long 1,759 shares of XYZ. This can easily be "cured" by 
shorting 1,700 or 1,800 shares ofXYZ to neutralize the delta. Consequently, the com­
plete position, including the short 1,700 shares, would be neutral with respect to both 
delta and gamma, and would have the desired negative vega. 
The actual profit picture at expiration is shown in Figure 40-11. Bear in mind, 
however, that the strategist would normally not intend to hold a position like this until 
expiration. He would close it out if his expectations on volatility decline were fulfilled 
( or proved false). 
FIGURE 40-11. 
Spread with negative vega; gamma and delta neutral. 
40000...., .... 
10000 
50 55 60 
XVZ :Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 945 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 883 
One other point should be made: The fact that gamma and delta are neutral to 
begin with does not mean that they will remain neutral indefinitely as the stock 
moves (or even as volatility changes). However, there will be little or no effect of 
stock price movements on the position in the short run. 
In summary, then, one can always create a position that is neutral with respect 
to both gamma and delta by first choosing a ratio that makes the gamma zero, and 
then using a position in the underlying security to neutralize the delta that is created 
by the chosen ratio. This type of position would always involve two options and some 
stock. The resulting position will not necessarily be neutral with respect to the other 
risk factors. 
THE MATHEMATICAL APPROACH 
The strategist should be aware that the process of determining neutrality in several 
of the risk variables can be handled quite easily by a computer. All that is required is 
to solve a series of simultaneous equations. 
In the preceding example, the resulting vega was negative: -$238. For each 
decline of 1 percentage point in volatility from .the current level of 35%, one could 
expect to make $238. This result could have been reached by another method, as 
long as one were willing to spell out in advance the amount of vega risk he wants to 
accept. Then, he can also assume the gamma is zero and solve for the quantity of 
options to trade in the spread. The delta would be neutralized, as above, by using the 
common stock. 
Example: Prices are the same as in the preceding example. XYZ is 48. There are 
three months to expiration, and the volatility of XYZ and its options is 35%. The fol­
lowing information is also the same: 
Option 
April 50 call 
April 60 call 
Price 
2.50 
1.01 
Delta 
0.47 
0.17 
Gamma 
0.045 
0.026 
Vega 
0.08 
0.06 
A spreader expects volatility to decline and is willing to set up a position where­
by he will profit by $250 for each one percentage decrease in volatility. Moreover, he 
wants to be gamma and delta neutral. He knows that he can eventually neutralize any 
delta by using XYZ common stock, as in the previous example. How many options 
should be spread to achieve the desired result? 

===== PDF PAGE 946 =====
884 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatiHty 
To answer the question, one must create two equations in two unknowns, x and 
y. The unknowns represent the quantities of options to be bought and sold, respec­
tively. The constants in the equations are taken from the table above. 
The first equation represents gamma neutral: 
0.045 X + 0.026 y = 0, 
where 
xis the number of April 50's in the spread and y is the number of April 60's. Note 
that the constants in the equation are the gammas of the two calls involved. 
The second equation represents the desired vega risk of making 2.5 points, or $250, 
if the volatility decreases: 
0.08 X + 0.06 y = - 2.5, 
where 
x and y are the same quantities as in the first equation, and the constants in this equa­
tion are the gammas of the options. Furthermore, note that the vega risk is negative, 
since the spreader wants to profit if volatility decreases. 
Solving the two equations in two unknowns by algebraic methods yields the fol­
lowing results: 
Equations: 
0.045 X + 0.026 y = 0 
0.08 X + 0.06 Y = - 2.5 
Solutions: 
X = 104.80 
y = -181.45 
This means that one would buy 105 April 50 calls, since x being positive means that 
the options would be bought. He would also sell 181 April 60 calls (y is negative, 
which implies that the calls would be sold). This is nearly the same ratio determined 
in the previous example. The quantities are slightly higher, since the vega here is 
-$250 instead of the -$238 achieved in the previous example. 
Finally, one would again determine the amount of stock to buy or sell to neu­
tralize the delta by computing the position delta: 
Position delta = 105 x 0.47 - 181 x 0.17 = 18.58 
Thus 1,858 shares of XYZ would be shorted to neutralize the position. 

===== PDF PAGE 947 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 885 
Note: All the equations cannot be set equal to zero, or the solution will be all 
zeros. This is easily handled by setting at least one equation equal to a small, nonzero 
quantity, such as 0.1. As long as at least one of the risk factors is nonzero, one can 
determine the neutral ratio for all other factors merely by solving these simultaneous 
equations. There are plenty of low-cost computer programs that can solve simultane­
ous equations such as these. 
This concept can be carried to greater lengths in order to determine the best 
spread to create in order to achieve the desired results. One might even try to use 
three different options, using the third option to neutralize delta, so that he wouldn't 
have to neutralize with stock. The third equation would use deltas as constants and 
would be set to equal zero, representing delta neutral. Solving this would require 
solving three equations in three unknowns, a simple matter for a computer. 
As long as at least one of the risk factors is nonzero, one can determine the neu­
tral ratio for all other factors merely by solving these simultaneous equations. Even 
more importantly, the computer can scan many combinations of options that produce 
a position that is both gamma and delta neutral and has a specific position vega 
(-$238, for example). One would then choose the "best" spread of the available pos­
sibilities by logical methods including, if possible, choosing one with positive theta, 
so time is working in his favor. 
To summarize, one can neutralize all variables, or he can specify the risk that he 
wants to accept in any of them. Merely write the equations and solve them. It is best 
to use a computer to do this, but the fact that it can be done adds an entirely new, 
broad dimension to option spreading and risk-reducing strategies. 
EVALUATING A POSITION USING THE RISK MEASURES 
The previous sections have dealt with establishing a new position and determining its 
neutrality or lack thereof. However, the most important use of these risk measures is 
to predict how a position will perform into the future. At a minimum, a serious strate­
gist should use a computer to print out a projection of the profits and losses and posi­
tion risk at future expected prices. Moreover, this type of analysis should be done for 
several future times in order to give the strategist an idea of how the passage of time 
and the resultant larger movements by the underlying security would affect the posi­
tion. 
First, one would choose an appropriate time period - say, 7 days hence - for the 
first analysis. Then he should use the statistical projection of stock prices (see Chapter 
28 on mathematical applications) to determine probable prices for the underlying 
security at that time. Obviously, this stock price projection needs to use volatility, and 

===== PDF PAGE 948 =====
886 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
that is somewhat variable. But, for the purposes of such a projection, it is acceptable 
to use the current volatility. The results of as many as 9 stock prices might be dis­
played: every one-half standard deviation from -2 through + 2 (-2.0, -1.5, -1.0, 
-0.5, 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0). 
Example: XYZ is at 60 and has a volatility of 35%. A distribution of stock prices 7 
days into the future would be determined using the equation: 
Future Price = Current Price x eav-ft 
where 
a corresponds to the constants in the following table: (-2.0 ... 2.0): 
# Standard Deviations 
-2.0 
- 1.5 
- 1.0 
-0.5 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
Projected Stack Price 
54.46 
55.79 
57.16 
58.56 
60.00 
61.47 
62.98 
64.52 
66.11 
Again, refer to Chapter 28 on mathematical applications for a more in-depth 
discussion of this price determination equation. 
Note that the formula used to project prices has time as one of its components. 
This means that as we look further out in time, the range of possible stock prices will 
expand - a necessary and logical component of this analysis. For example, if the 
prices were being determined 14 days into the future, the range of prices would be 
from 52.31 to 68.82. That is, XYZ has the same probability of being at 54.46 in 7 days 
that it has of being at 52.31 in 14 days. At expiration, some 90 days hence, the range 
would be quite a bit wider still. Do not make the mistake of trying to evaluate the 
position at the same prices for each time period (7 days, 14 days, 1 rnonth, expiration, 
etc.). Such an analysis would be wrong. 
Once the appropriate stock prices have been determined, the following quanti­
ties would be calculated for each stock price: profit or loss, position delta, position 
gamma, position theta, and position vega. (Position rho is generally a less important 
risk measure for stock and futures short-term options.) Armed with this information, 
the strategist can be prepared to face the future. An important item to note: A model 

===== PDF PAGE 949 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 887 
will necessarily be used to make these projections. As was shown earlier, if there is a 
distortion in the current implied volatilities of the options involved in the position, 
the strategist should use the current implieds as input to the model for future option 
price projections. If he does not, the position may look overly attractive if expensive 
options are being sold or cheap ones are being bought. A truer profit picture is 
obtained by propagating the current implied volatility structure into the near future. 
Using an example similar to the previous one a ratio spread using short stock 
to make it delta neutral - the concepts will be described. 
Initial Position. XYZ is at 60. The January 70 calls, which have three months 
until expiration, are expensive with respect to the January 60 calls. A strategist 
expects this discrepancy to disappear when the implied volatility of XYZ options 
decreases. He therefore established the following position, which is both gamma 
and delta neutral. 
Position Delta Gamma 
Long 100 January 60 calls 0.57 0.0723 
Short 240 January 70 calls 0.20 0.0298 
Short 800 XYZ 
The risk measures for the entire position are: 
Position delta: -38 shares (virtually delta neutral) 
Position gamma: + 7 shares (gamma neutral) 
Position theta: + $263 
Position vega: -$827 
Theta Vega 
-0.020 0.109 
-0.019 0.080 
Thus, the position is both gamma and delta neutral. Moreover, it has the attrac­
tive feature of making $263 per day because of the positive theta. Finally, as was the 
intention of the spreader, it will make money if the volatility of XYZ declines: $827 
for each percentage point decrease in implied volatility. Two equations in two 
unknowns (gamma and vega) were solved to obtain the quantities to buy and sell. The 
resulting position delta was neutralized by selling 800 XYZ. 
The following analyses will assume that the relative expensiveness of the April 
70 calls persists. These are the calls that were sold in the position. If that overpricing 
should disappear, the spread would look more favorable, but there is no guarantee 
that they will cheapen - especially over a short time period such as one or two weeks. 
How would the position look in 7 days at the stock prices determined above? 

===== PDF PAGE 950 =====
888 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Vo/atillty 
Stock 
Price P&L Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
54.46 1905 - 7.40 1.62 0.94 - 1.57 
55.79 1077 - 4.90 2.07 1.18 - 1.96 
57.16 606 1.97 2.13 1.53 - 2.90 
58.56 528 0.74 1.65 2.00 -4.62 
60.00 771 2.38 0.56 2.63 -7.22 
61.47 1127 2.07 - 1.01 3.38 -10.63 
62.98 1252 - 0.87 - 2.85 4.22 -14.56 
64.52 702 - 6.73 - 4.67 5.07 -18.61 
66.11 - 1019 -15.42 - 6.21 5.85 -22.31 
In a similar manner, the position would have the following characteristics after 
14 days had passed: 
Stock 
Price P&L Delto Gamma Theta Vega 
52.31 4221 - 9.10 0.69 0.55 - 0.98 
54.14 2731 - 6.93 1.69 0.75 - 0.89 
56.02 1782 - 2.87 2.51 1.06 - 1.21 
57.98 1717 2.17 2.44 1.61 - 2.69 
60.00 2577 5.85 1.00 2.51 -6.00 
62.09 3839 5.29 - 1.63 3.73 -11.05 
64.26 4361 - 1.55 - 4.61 5.09 -16.90 
66.50 2631 -14.80 - 7.02 6.31 -22.17 
68.82 - 2799 -32.83 - 8.32 7.18 -25.72 
The same information will be presented graphically in Figure 40-13 so that 
those who prefer pictures instead of columns of numbers can follow the discussions 
easily. 
First, the profitability of the spread can be examined. This profit picture 
assumes that the volatility of XYZ remains unchanged. Note that in 7 days, there is a 
small profit if the stock remains unchanged. This is to be expected, since theta was 
positive, and therefore time is working in favor of this spread. Likewise, in 14 days, 
there is an even bigger profit if XYZ remains relatively unchanged - again due to the 
positive theta. Overall, there is an expected profit of $800 in 7 days, or $2,600 in 14 
days, from this position. This indicates that it is an attractive situation statistically, but, 
of course, it does not mean that one cannot lose money. 

===== PDF PAGE 951 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 889 
Continuing to look at the profit picture, the downside is favorable to the spread 
since the short stock in the position would contribute to ever larger profits in the case 
that XYZ tumbles dramatically (see Figure 40-12). The upside is where problems 
could develop. In 7 days, the position breaks even at about 65 on the upside; in 14 
days, it breaks even at about 67.50. 
The reader may be asking, "Why is there such a dramatic risk to the upside? I 
thought the position was delta neutral and gamma neutral." True, the position was 
originally neutral with respect to both those variables. That neutrality explains the 
flatness of the profit curves about the current stock price of 60. However, once the 
stock has moved 1.50 standard deviations to the upside, the neutrality begins to dis­
appear. To see this, let us look at Figures 40-13 and 40-14 that show both the posi­
tion delta and position gamma 7 days and 14 days after the spread was established. 
Again, these are the same numbers listed in the previous tables. 
First, look at the position delta in 7 days (Figure 40-13). Note that the position 
remains relatively delta neutral with XYZ between 57 and 63. This is because the 
gamma was initially neutral. However, the position begins to get quite delta short if 
XYZ rises above 63 or falls below 57 in 7 days. What is happening to gamma while 
this is going on? Since we just observed that the delta eventually changes, that has to 
mean that the position is acquiring some gamma. 
FIGURE 40-12. 
XYZ ratio spread, gamma and delta neutral. 
4300 
3400 
2500 
1600 
~ 700 a.. 
0 
-200 53 55 57 59 61 63 
.-1100 
-2000 
Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 952 =====
890 
FIGURE 40-13. 
XYZ ratio spread, position delta. 
-300 
-800 
fu -1300 w 
-1800 
-2300 
-2800 
FIGURE 40-14. 
Stock Price 
XYZ ratio spread, position gamma. 
100 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
67 
0t----....----....----,---.---'"""".,------,----,---r--
-100 
«l 
E E -300 
«l 
0 
-500 
-700 
63 65 67 
Stock Price 

===== PDF PAGE 953 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 891 
Figure 40-14 depicts the fact that gamma is not very stable, considering that it 
started at nearly zero. If XYZ falls, gamma increases a little, reflecting the fact that 
the position will get somewhat shorter as XYZ falls. But since there are only calls cou­
pled with short stock in this position, there is no risk to the downside. Positive 
gamma, even a small positive gamma like this one, is beneficial to stock movement. 
The upside is another matter entirely. The gamma begins to become seriously 
negative above a stock price of 63 in 7 days. Recall that negative gamma means that 
one's position is about to react poorly to price changes in the market - the position 
will soon be "fighting the market." As the stock goes even higher, the gamma 
becomes even more negative. These observations apply to stock price movements in 
either 7 days or 14 days; in fact, the effect on gamma does not seem to be particu­
larly dependent on time in this example, since the two lines on Figure 40-15 are very 
close to each other. 
The above information depicts in detailed form the fact that this position will 
not behave well if the stock rises too far in too short a time. However, stable stock 
prices will produce profits, as will falling prices. These are not earth-shattering con­
clusions since, by simple observation, one can see that there are extra short calls plus 
some short stock in the position. However, the point of calculating this information 
in advance is to be able to anticipate where to make adjustments and how much to 
adjust. 
Follow-Up Action. How should the strategist use this information? A sim­
plistic approach is to adjust the delta as it becomes non-neutral. This won't do 
anything for gamma, however, and may therefore not necessarily be the best 
approach. If one were to adjust only the delta, he would do it in the following 
manner: The chart of delta (Figure 40-13) shows that the position will be 
approximately delta short 800 shares if XYZ rises to 64.50 in a week. One sim­
ple plan would be to cover the 800 shares of XYZ that are short if the stock rises 
to 64.50. Covering the 800 shares would return the position to delta neutral at 
that time. Note that if the stock rises at a slower pace, the point at which the 
strategist would cover the 800 shares moves higher. For example, the delta in 14 
days (again in Figure 40-13) shows that XYZ would have to be at about 65.50 for 
the position to be delta short 800 shares. Hence, if it took two weeks for XYZ to 
begin rising, one could wait until 65.50 before covering the 800 shares and 
returning the position to delta neutral. 
In either case, the purchase of the 800 shares does not take care of the negative 
gamma that is creeping into the position as the stock rises. The only way to counter 
negative gamma is to buy options, not stock. To return a position to neutrality with 

===== PDF PAGE 954 =====
892 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
respect to more than one risk variable requires one to approach the problem as he 
did when the position was established: Neutralize the gamma first, and then use stock 
to adjust the delta. Note the difference between this approach and the one described 
in the previous paragraph. Here, we are trying to adjust gamma first, and will get to 
delta later. 
In order to add some positive gamma, one might want to buy back (cover) some 
of the January 70 calls that are currently short. Suppose that the decision is made to 
cover when XYZ reaches 65.50 in 14 days. From the graph above, one can see that 
the position would be approximately gamma short 700 shares at the time. Suppose 
that the gamma of the January 70 calls is 0.07. Then, one would have to cover 100 
January 70 calls to add 700 shares of positive gamma to the position, returning it to 
gamma neutral. This purchase would, of course, make the position delta long, so 
some stock would have to be sold short as well in order to make the position delta 
neutral once again. 
Thus, the procedure for follow-up action is somewhat similar to that for estab­
lishing the position: First, neutralize the gamma and then eliminate the resulting 
delta by using the common stock. The resulting profit graph will not be shown for 
this follow-up adjustment, since the process could go on and on. However, a few 
observations are pertinent. First, the purchase of calls to reduce the negative gamma 
hurts the original thesis of the position - to have negative vega and positive theta, if 
possible. Buying calls will add vega to and subtract theta from the position, which is 
not desirable. However, it is more desirable than letting losses build up in the posi­
tion as the stock continues to run to the upside. Second, one might choose to rerrwve 
the position if it is profitable. This might happen if the volatility did decrease as 
expected. Then, when the stock rallies, producing negative gamma, one might actu­
ally have a profit, because his assumption concerning volatility had been right. If he 
does not see much further potential gains from decreasing volatility, he might use the 
point at which negative gamma starts to build up as the exit point from his position. 
Third, one might choose to accept the acquired gamma risk. Rather than jeopardize 
his initial thesis, one may just want to adjust the delta and let the gamma build up. 
This is no longer a neutral strategy, but one may have reasons for approaching the 
position this way. At least he has calculated the risk and is aware of it. If he chooses 
to accept it rather than eliminate it, that is his decision. 
Finally, it is obvious that the process is dynamic. As factors change (stock price, 
volatility, time), the position itself changes and the strategist is presented with new 
choices. There is no absolutely correct adjustment. The process is more of an art than 
a science at times. Moreover, the strategist should continue to recalculate these prof­
it pictures and risk measures as the stock moves and time passes, or if there is a 

===== PDF PAGE 955 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 893 
change in the securities involved in the position. There is one absolute truism and 
that is that the serious strategist should be aware of the risk his position has with 
respect to at least the four basic measures of delta, gamma, theta, and vega. To be 
ignorant of the risk is to be delinquent in the management of the position. 
TRADING GAMMA FROM THE LONG SIDE 
The strategist who is selling overpriced options and hedging that purchase with other 
options or stock will often have a position similar to the one described earlier. Large 
stock movements - at least in one direction will typically be a problem for such 
positions. The opposite of this strategy would be to have a position that is long 
gamma. That is, the position does better if the stock moves quickly in one direction. 
While this seems pleasing to the psyche, these types of positions have their own 
brand of risk. 
The simplest position with long gamma is a long straddle, or a backspread 
(reverse ratio spread). Another way to construct a position with long gamma is to 
invert a calendar spread - to buy the near-term option and to sell a longer-term one. 
Since a near-term option has a higher gamma than a longer-term one with the same 
strike, such a position has long gamma. In fact, traders who expect violent action in 
a stock often construct such a position for the very reason that the public will come 
in behind them, bid up the short-term calls (increasing their implied volatility), and 
make the spread more profitable for the trader. 
Unfortunately, all of these positions often involve being long just about every­
thing else, including theta and vega as well. This means that time is working against 
the position, and that swings in implied volatility can be helpful or harmful as well. 
Can one construct a position that is long gamma, but is not so subject to the other 
variables? Of course he can, but what would it look like? The answer, as one might 
suspect, is not an ironclad one. 
For the following examples, assume these prices exist: 
XYZ: 60 
Option 
March 60 call 
June 60 call 
Price 
3.25 
5.50 
Delta 
0.54 
0.57 
Gamma 
0.0510 
0.0306 
Theta 
0.033 
0.021 
Vega 
0.089 
0.147 
Example: Suppose that a strategist wants to create a position that is gamma long, but 
is neutral with respect to both delta and vega. He thinks the stock will move, but is 
not sure of the price direction, and does not want to have any risk with respect to 

===== PDF PAGE 956 =====
894 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
quick changes in volatility. In order to quantify the statement that he "wants to be 
gamma long," let us assume that he wants to be gamma long 1,000 shares or 10 con­
tracts. 
It is known that delta can always be neutralized last, so let us concentrate on the 
other two variables first. The two equations below are used to determine the quanti­
ties to buy in order to make gamma long and vega neutral: 
0.0510x + 0.0306y = 10 (gamma, expressed in# of contracts) 
0.089x + 0.147y = 0 (vega) 
The solution to these equations is: 
X = 308, y = -186 
Thus, one would buy 308 March 60 calls and would sell 186 June 60 calls. This is the 
reverse calendar spread that was discussed: Near-term calls are bought and longer­
term calls are sold. 
Finally, the delta must be neutralized. To do this, calculate the position delta 
using the quantities just determined: 
Position delta= 0.54 x 308 - 0.57 x 186 = 60.30 
So, the position is long 60 contracts, or 6,000 shares. It can be made delta neutral by 
selling short 6,000 shares of XYZ. 
The overall position would look like this: 
Position 
Short 6,000 XYZ 
Long 308 March 60 calls 
Short 186 June 60 calls 
Its risk measurements are: 
Delta 
1.00 
0.54 
0.57 
Position delta: long 30 shares (neutral) 
Position vega: $7 (neutral) 
Position gamma: long 1,001 shares 
Gamma 
0 
0.0510 
0.0306 
Vega 
0 
0.089 
0.147 
This position then satisfies the initial objectives of wanting to be gamma long 
1,000 shares, but delta and vega neutral. 
Finally, note that theta = -$625. The position will lose $625 per day from time 
decay. 
The strategist must go further than this analysis, especially if one is dealing with 
positions that are not simple constructions. He should calculate a profit picture as 

===== PDF PAGE 957 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 895 
well as look at how the risk measures behave as time passes and the stock price 
changes. 
Figure 40-15 (see Tables 40-10, 40-11, and 40-12) shows the profit potential in 
7 days, in 14 days, and at March expiration. Figure 40-16 shows the position vega at 
the 7- and 14-day time intervals. Before discussing these items, the data will be pre­
sented in tabular form at three different times: in 7 days, in 14 days, and at March 
expiration. 
The data in Table 40-10 depict the position in 7 days. 
Table 40-11 represents the results in 14 days. 
Finally, the position as it looks at March expiration should be known as well (see 
Table 40-12). 
In each case, note that the stock prices are calculated in accordance with the 
statistical formula shown in the last section. The more time that passes, the further it 
is possible for the stock to roam from the current price. 
The profit picture (Figure 40-15) shows that this position looks much like a long 
straddle would: It makes large, symmetric profits if the stock goes either way up or 
way down. Moreover, the losses if the stock remains relatively unchanged can be 
large. These losses tend to mount right away, becoming significant even in 14 days. 
Hence, if one enters this type of position, he had better get the desired stock move­
ment quickly, or be prepared to cut his losses and exit the position. 
The most startling thing to note about the entire position is the devastating effect 
of time on the position. The profit picture shows that large losses will result if the stock 
movement that is expected does not materialize. These losses are completely due to 
time decay. Theta is negative in the initial position ($625 of losses per day), and 
remains negative and surprisingly constant - until March expiration ( when the long 
calls expire). Time also affects vega. Notice how the vega begins to get negative right 
away and keeps getting much more negative as time passes. Simply, it can be seen that 
as time passes, the position becomes vulnerable to increases in implied volatility. 
This relationship between time and volatility might not be readily apparent to 
the strategist unless he takes the time to calculate these sorts of tables or figures. In 
fact, one may be somewhat confounded by this observation. What is happening is 
that as time passes, the options that are owned are less explosive if volatility increas­
es, but the options that were sold have a lot of time remaining, and are therefore apt 
to increase violently if volatility spurts upward. 
Figures 40-17 and 40-18 provide less enlightening information about delta and 
gamma. Since gamma was positive to start with, the delta increases dramatically as 
the stock rises, and decreases just as fast if the stock falls (Figure 40-18). This is stan­
dard behavior for positions with long gamma; a long straddle would look very similar. 

===== PDF PAGE 958 =====
896 
FIGURE 40-15. 
Trading long gamma, profit picture. 
80,000 
60,000 
40,000 
20,000 
-20,000 
-40,000 
-60,000 
TABLE 40-1 O. 
Stock Price 
Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Risk measures of long gamma position in 7 days. 
Stock 
Price P&L Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
54.46 12259 - 58.72 8.28 4.15 - 5.74 
55.79 5202 - 46.60 9.78 5.20 - 4.18 
57.16 - 224 - 32.45 10.80 6.09 - 2.85 
58.56 - 3670 - 16.91 11.25 6.73 - 1.94 
60.00 - 4975 - 0.80 11.08 7.04 - l .63 
61.47 - 3901 15.01 10.32 6.98 - 1.96 
62.98 - 507 29.69 9.09 6.57 - 2.89 
64.52 5105 42.56 7.54 5.87 -4.29 
66. l l 12717 53. l 7 5.86 4.97 - 5.96 
Notice that gamma remains positive throughout (Figure 40-17), although it falls to 
smaller levels if the stock moves toward the end of the pricing ranges used in the 
analyses. Again, this is standard action for a long straddle. 

===== PDF PAGE 959 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-16. 
Trading long gamma, position vega. 
55 60 
0 
-2 
-4 
al 
0) 
~ 
-6 
-8 
-10 
Stock Price 
TABLE 40-11. 
65 
Risk measures of long gamma position in 14 days. 
Stock 
Price P&L Delta Gamma 
52.31 24945 - 79.34 4.75 
54.14 11445 - 67.68 8.00 
56.02 277 -49.79 10.79 
57.98 - 7263 -26.87 12.42 
60.00 - 10141 - 1.44 12.47 
62.09 - 7784 23.32 10.99 
64.26 347 44.47 8.45 
66.50 11491 60.12 5.55 
68.82 26672 69.81 2.92 
891 
Theta Vega 
2.10 - 9.91 
3.91 - 7.87 
5.76 - 5.56 
7.21 - 3.73 
7.88 - 3.04 
7.60 - 3.78 
6.47 - 5.71 
4.82 - 8.20 
3.09 -10.48 
So, is this a good position? That is a difficult question to answer unless one 
knows what is going to happen to the underlying stock. Statistically, this type of posi­
tion has a negative expected return and would generally produce losses over the long 
run. However, in situations in which the near-term options are destined to get over­
heated - perhaps because of a takeover rumor or just a leak of material information 

===== PDF PAGE 960 =====
898 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
TABLE 40-12. 
Risk measures of long gamma position at March expiration. 
Stock 
Price P&L Delta 
46.19 81327 - 75.69 
49.31 55628 - 89.84 
52.64 22378 -110.50 
56.20 - 21523 -136.65 
60.00 78907 144.68 
64.06 - 25946 117.44 
68.39 19787 95.03 
73.01 59732 79.05 
77.95 96062 69.19 
FIGURE 40-17. 
Trading long gamma, position gamma. 
(J) 
(I) 
1200 
1000 
800 
~ 600 .c 
(/) 
400 
200 
55 60 
Stock Price 
Gamma Theta Vega 
- 3.65 -1.32 - 6.88 
- 5.39 -2.25 -11.43 
- 6.89 -3.33 -16.50 
- 7.62 -4.28 -20.67 
- 7.29 -4.79 -22.49 
- 6.03 -4.70 -21.26 
- 4.31 -4.10 -17.44 
- 2.67 -3.24 -12.43 
- 1.43 -2.41 - 7.69 
65 
about a company - many sophisticated traders establish this type of position to take 
advantage of the expected explosion in stock price. 
Other Variations. Without going into as much detail, it is possible to com­
pare the above position with similar ones. The purpose in doing so is to illustrate 
how a change in the strategist's initial requirements would alter the established 

===== PDF PAGE 961 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-1 8. 
Trading long gamma, position delta. 
6000 
4000 
2000 
"' ~ 01---------,-----~rr------,,-----
.s::. 
(J) 
-2000 
-4000 
-8000 
-8000 
55 65 
Stock Price 
899 
position. In the preceding position, the strategist wanted to be gamma long, but 
neutral with respect to delta and volatility. Suppose he not only expects price 
movement (meaning he wants positive gamma), but also expects an increase in 
volatility. If that were the case, he would want positive vega as well. Suppose he 
quantifies that desire by deciding that he wants to make $1,000 for every one 
percentage increase in volatility. The simultaneous equations would then be: 
0.050lx + 0.0306y = 10 (gamma) 
0.089x + 0.147y = 10 (vega) 
The solution to these equations is: 
X = 243, y = -80 
Furthermore, 8,500 shares would have to be sold short in order to make the position 
delta neutral. The resulting position would then be: 
Short 8,500 XYZ 
Long 243 March 60 calls 
Short 80 June 60 calls 
Delta: neutral 
Gamma: long 1,000 shares 
Vega: long $1,000 
Theta: long $630 

===== PDF PAGE 962 =====
900 Part VI: Measuring and Trading VolatiHty 
Recall that the position discussed in the last section was vega neutral and was: 
Short 6,000 XYZ 
Long 308 March 60 calls 
Short 186 June 60 calls 
Delta: neutral 
Gamma: long 1,000 shares 
Vega: neutral 
Theta: long $625 
Notice that in the new position, there are over three times as many long March 
60 calls as there are short June 60 calls. This is a much larger ratio than in the vega 
neutral position, in which about 1.6 calls were bought for each one sold. This even 
greater preponderance of near-term calls that are purchased means the newer posi­
tion has an even larger exposure to time decay than did the previous one. That is, in 
order to acquire the positive vega, one is forced to take on even more risk with 
respect to time decay. For that reason, this is a less desirable position than the first 
one; it seems overly risky to want to be both long gamma and long volatility. 
This does not necessarily mean that one would never want to be long volatility. 
In fact, if one expected volatility to increase, he might want to establish a position that 
was delta neutral and gamma neutral, but had positive vega. Again, using the same 
prices as in the previous examples, the following position would satisfy these criteria: 
Short 2,600 XYZ 
Short 64 March 60 calls 
Long 106 June 60 calls 
Delta: neutral 
Gamma: neutral 
Vega: long $1,000 
Theta: long $11 
This position has a more conventional form. It is a calendar spread, except that 
more long calls are purchased. Moreover, the theta of this position is only $11- it will 
only lose $11 per day to time decay. At first glance it might seem like the best of the 
three choices. Unfortunately, when one draws the profit graph (Figure 40-19), he 
finds that this position has significant downside risk: The short stock cannot com­
pensate for the large quantity of June 60 calls. Still, the position does make money on 
the upside, and will also make money if volatility increases. If the near-term March 
calls were overpriced with respect to the June calls at the time the position was estab­
lished, it would make it even more desirable. 
To summarize, defining the risks one wants to take or avoid specifies the con­
struction of the eventual position. The strategist should examine the potential risks 
and rewards, especially the profit picture. If the potential risks are not desirable, the 
strategist should rethink his requirements and try again. Thus, in the example pre­
sented, the strategist felt that he initially wanted to be long gamma, but it involved too 

===== PDF PAGE 963 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 
FIGURE 40-19. 
Trading long gamma, 11 conventional" calendar. 
7500 
5000 
2500 
fJ) 
fJ) 
.3 :;:, 0 '§ 45 50 Q. 
-2500 
-5000 At March Expiration 
-7500 
Stock Price 
901 
75 
much risk of time decay. A second attempt was made, introducing positive volatility 
into the situation, but that didn't seem to help much. Finally, a third analysis was gen­
erated involving only long volatility and not long gamma. The resulting position has lit­
tle time risk, but has risk if the stock drops in price. It is probably the best of the three. 
The strategist arrives at this conclusion through a logical process of analysis. 
ADVANCED MATHEMATICAL CONCEPTS 
The remainder of this chapter is a short adjunct to Chapter 28 on mathematical 
applications. It is quite technical. Those who desire to understand the basic concepts 
behind the risk measures and perhaps to utilize them in more advanced ways will be 
interested in what follows. 
CALCULATING THE "'GREEKS" 
It is known that the equation for delta is a direct byproduct of the Black-Scholes 
model calculation: 
~ = N(dl) 

===== PDF PAGE 964 =====
902 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Each of the risk measures can be derived mathematically by taking the partial 
derivative of the model. However, there is a shortcut approximation that works just 
as well. For example, the formula for gamma is as follows: 
x=ln[ P ]/v-ft+v-ft 
s X (1 + r)t 2 
r - e(-x212) 
- pv ✓ 27tt 
There is a simpler, yet correct, way to arrive at the gamma. The delta is the par­
tial derivative of the Black-Scholes model with respect to stock price - that is, it is 
the amount by which the option's price changes for a change in stock price. The 
gamma is the change in delta for the same change in stock price. Thus, one can 
approximate the gamma by the following steps: 
1. Calculate the delta with p = Current stock price. 
2. Set p = p + 1 and recalculate the delta. 
3. Gamma = delta from step 1 - delta from step 2. 
The same procedure can be used for the other "greeks": 
Vega: 1. Calculate the option price with a particular volatility. 
2. 
3. 
Theta: 1. 
2. 
3. 
Rho: 1. 
2. 
3. 
Calculate another option price with volatility increased by 1 %. 
Vega = difference of the prices in steps 1 and 2. 
Calculate the option price with the current time to expiration. 
Calculate the option price with 1 day less time remaining to expiration. 
Theta = difference of the prices in steps 1 and 2. 
Calculate the option price with the current risk-free interest rate. 
Calculate the option price with the rate increased by 1 % . 
Rho = difference of the prices in steps 1 and 2. 
THE GAMMA OF THE GAMMA 
The discussion of this concept was deferred from earlier sections because it is some­
what difficult to grasp. It is included now for those who may wish to use it at some 
time. Those readers who are not interested in such matters may skip to the next sec­
tion. 

===== PDF PAGE 965 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 903 
Recall that this is the sixth risk measurement of an option position. The gamma 
of the gamma is the anwunt by which the gamma will change when the stock price 
changes. 
Recall that in the earlier discussion of gamma, it was noted that gamma 
changes. This example is based on the same example used earlier. 
Example: With XYZ at 49, assume the January 50 call has a delta of 0.50 and a 
gamma of 0.05. If XYZ moves up 1 point to 50, the delta of the call will increase by 
the amount of the gamma: It will increase from 0.50 to 0.55. Simplistically, if XYZ 
moves up another point to 51, the delta will increase by another 0.05, to 0.60. 
Obviously, the delta cannot keep increasing by 0.05 each time XYZ gains anoth­
er point in price, for it will eventually exceed 1.00 by that calculation, and it is known 
that the delta has a maximum of 1.00. Thus, it is obvious that the gamma changes. 
In reality, the gamma decreases as the stock moves away from the strike. Thus, 
with XYZ at 51, the gamma might only be 0.04. Therefore, if XYZ moved up to 52, 
the call's delta would only increase by 0.04, to 0.64. Hence, the gamma of the gamma 
is -0.01, since the gamma decreased from .05 to .04 when the stock rose by one 
point. 
As XYZ moves higher and higher, the gamma will get smaller and smaller. 
Eventually, with XYZ in the low 60's, the delta will be nearly 1.00 and the gamma 
nearly 0.00. 
This change in the gamma as the stock moves is called the gamma of the 
gamma. It is probably referred to by other names, but since its use is limited to only 
the most sophisticated traders, there is no standard name. Generally, one would use 
this measure on his entire portfolio to gauge how quickly the portfolio would be 
responding to the position gamma. 
Example: With XYZ at 31. 75 as in some of the previous examples, the following risk 
measures exist: 
Option Option Option Position 
Position Delta Gamma Gamma/Gamma Gamma/Gamma 
Short 4,500 XYZ 1.00 0.00 0.0000 0 
Short 100 XYZ April 25 calls 0.89 0.01 -0.0015 -15 
Long 50 XYZ April 30 calls 0.76 0.03 -0.0006 - 3 
Long 139 XYZ July 30 calls 0.74 0.02 -0.0003 - 4 
Total Gamma of Gamma: -22 

===== PDF PAGE 966 =====
904 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Recall that, in the same example used to describe gamma, the position was delta 
long 686 shares and had a positive gamma of 328 shares. Furthermore, we now see 
that the gamma itself is going to decrease as the stock moves up ( it is negative) or will 
increase as the stock moves down. In fact, it is expected to increase or decrease by 
22 shares for each point XYZ moves. 
So, if XYZ moves up by 1 point, the following should happen: 
a. Delta increases from 686 to 1,014, increasing by the amount of the gamma. 
b. Gamma decreases from 328 to 306, indicating that a further upward move by 
XYZ will result in a smaller increase in delta. 
One can build a general picture of how the gamma of the gamma changes over 
different situations - in- or out-of-the-money, or with more or less time remaining 
until expiration. The following table of two index calls, the January 350 with one 
month of life remaining and the December 350 with eleven months of life remain­
ing, shows the delta, gamma, and gamma of the gamma for various stock prices. 
Index January 350 call December 350 call 
Price Delta Gamma Gamma/Gamma Delta Gamma Gamma/Gamma 
310 .0006 .0001 .0000 .3203 .0083 .0000 
320 .0087 .0020 .0004 .3971 .0082 .0000 
330 .0618 .0100 .0013 .4787 .0080 -.0000 
340 .2333 .0744 .0013 .5626 .0078 -.0001 
350 .5241 .0309 -.0003 .6360 .0073 -.0001 
360 .7957 .0215 -.0014 .6984 .0067 -.0001 
370 .9420 .0086 -.0010 .7653 .0060 -.0001 
380 .9892 .0021 -.0003 .8213 .0052 -.0001 
Several conclusions can be drawn, not all of which are obvious at first glance. 
First of all, the gamma of the gamma for long-term options is very small. This should 
be expected, since the delta of a long-term option changes very slowly. The next fact 
can best be observed while looking at the shorter-term January 350 table. The 
gamma of the gamma is near zero for deeply out-of-the-money options. But, as the 
option comes closer to being in-the-money, the gamma of the gamma becomes a pos­
itive number, reaching its maximum while the option is still out-of-the-money. By the 
time the option is at-the-money, the gamma of the gamma has turned negative. It 
then remains negative, reaching its most negative point when slightly in-the-money. 
From there on, as the option goes even deeper into-the-money, the gamma of the 
gamma remains negative but gets closer and closer to zero, eventually reaching 
(minus) zero when the option is very far in-the-money. 

===== PDF PAGE 967 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 905 
Can one possibly reason this risk measurement out without making severe 
mathematical calculations? Well, possibly. Note that the delta of an option starts as a 
small number when the option is out-of-the-money. It then increases, slowly at first, 
then more quickly, until it is just below 0.60 for an at-the-money option. From there 
on, it will continue to increase, but much more slowly as the option becomes in-the­
money. This movement of the delta can be observed by looking at gamma: It is the 
change in the delta, so it starts slowly, increases as the stock nears the strike, and then 
begins to decrease as the option is in-the-money, always remaining a positive num­
ber, since delta can only change in the positive direction as the stock rises. Finally, 
the gamma of the gamma is the change in the gamma, so it in tum starts as a positive 
number as gamma grows larger; but then when gamma starts tapering off, this is 
reflected as a negative gamma of the gamma. 
In general, the gamma of the gamma is used by sophisticated traders on large 
option positions where it is not obvious what is going to happen to the gamma as the 
stock changes in price. Traders often have some feel for their delta. They may even 
have some feel for how that delta is going to change as the stock moves (i.e., they 
have a feel for gamma). However, sophisticated traders know that even positions that 
start out with zero delta and zero gamma may eventually acquire some delta. The 
gamma of the gamma tells the trader how much and how soon that eventual delta will 
be acquired. 
MEASURING THE DIFFERENCE OF IMPLIED VOLATILITIES 
Recall that when the topic of implied volatility was discussed, it was shown that if one 
could identify situations in which the various options on the same underlying securi­
ty had substantially different implied volatilities, then there might be an attractive 
neutral spread available. The strategist might ask how he is to determine if the dis­
crepancies between the individual options are significantly large to warrant attention. 
Furthermore, is there a quick way (using a computer, of course) to determine this? 
A logical way to approach this is to look at each individual implied volatility and 
compute the standard deviation of these numbers. This standard deviation can be 
converted to a percentage by dividing it by the overall implied volatility of the stock. 
This percentage, if it is large enough, alerts the strategist that there may be opportu­
nities to spread the options of this underlying security against each other. An exam­
ple should clarify this procedure. 
Example: XYZ is trading at 50, and the following options exist with the indicated 
implied volatilities. We can calculate a standard deviation of these implieds, called 
implied deviation, via the formula: 

===== PDF PAGE 968 =====
906 Part VI: Measuring and Trading Volatility 
Implied deviation = sqrt (sum of differences from mean) 2/(# options - 1) 
XYZ:50 
Implied 
Option Volatility 
October 45 call 21% 
November 45 call 21% 
January 45 call 23% 
October 50 call 32% 
November 50 call 30% 
January 50 call 28% 
October 55 call 40% 
November 55 call 37% 
January 55 call 34% 
Average: 30.44% 
Sum of ( difference from avg)2 = 389.26 
Implied deviation = sqrt (sum of diff)2/(# options - 1) 
= sqrt (389.26 I 8) 
= 6.98 
Difference 
from Average 
-9.44 
-9.44 
-7.44 
+ 1.56 
-0.44 
-2.44 
+9.56 
+6.56 
+3.56 
This figure represents the raw standard deviation of the implied volatilities. To 
convert it into a useful number for comparisons, one must divide it by the average 
implied volatility. 
P d . . Implied deviation ercent eV1at10n = A . 1. d verage imp ie 
= 6.98/30.44 
= 23% 
This "percent deviation" number is usually significant if it is larger than 15%. 
That is, if the various options have implied volatilities that are different enough from 
each other to produce a result of 15% or greater in the above calculation, then the 
strategist should take a look at establishing neutral spreads in that security or futures 
contract. 
The concept presented here can be refined further by using a weighted average 
of the implieds ( taking into consideration such factors as volume and distance from the 
striking price) rather than just using the raw average. That task is left to the reader. 

===== PDF PAGE 969 =====
Chapter 40: Advanced Concepts 907 
Recall that a computer can perform a large number of Black-Scholes calcula­
tions in a short period of time. Thus, the computer can calculate each option's 
implied volatility and then perform the "percent deviation" calculation even faster. 
The strategist who is interested in establishing this type of neutral spread would only 
have to scan down the list of percent deviations to find candidates for spreading. On 
a given day, the list is usually quite short - perhaps 20 stocks and 10 futures contracts 
will qualify. 
SUMMARY 
In today's highly competitive and volatile option markets, neutral traders must be 
extremely aware of their risks. That risk is not just risk at expiration, but also the cur­
rent risk in the market. Furthermore, they should have an idea of how the risk will 
increase or decrease as the underlying stock or futures contract moves up and down 
in price. Moreover, the passage of time or the volatility that the options are being 
assigned in the marketplace - the implied volatility - are important considerations. 
Even changes in short-term interest rates can be of interest, especially iflonger-term 
options (LEAPS) are involved. 
Once the strategist understands these concepts, he can use them to select new 
positions, to adjust existing ones, and to formulate specific strategies to take advan­
tage of them. He can select a specific criteria that he wants to exploit - selling high 
volatility, for example and use the other measures to construct a position that has 
little risk with respect to any of the other variables. Furthermore, the market-maker 
or specialist, who does not want to acquire any market risk if he can help it, will use 
these techniques to attempt to neutralize all of the current risk, if possible. 

===== PDF PAGE 970 =====
Taxes 
In this chapter, the basic tax treatment of listed options will be outlined and sev­
eral tax strategies will be presented. The reader should be aware of the fact that tax 
laws change, and therefore should consult tax counsel before actually implementing 
any tax-oriented strategy. The interpretation of certain tax strategies by the Internal 
Revenue Service is subject to reclarification or change, as well. 
An option is a capital asset and any gains or losses are capital gains or losses. 
Differing tax consequences apply, depending on whether the option trade is a 
complete transaction by itself, or whether it becomes part of a stock transaction via 
exercise or assignment. Listed option transactions that are closed out in the options 
market or are allowed to expire worthless are capital transactions. The holding period 
for option transactions to qualify as long-term is always the same as for stocks ( cur­
rently, it's one year). Gains from option purchases could possibly be long-term gains if 
the holding period of the option exceeds the long-term capital gains holding period. 
Gains from the sale of options are short-term capital gains. In addition, the tax 
treatment of futures options and index options and other listed nonequity options 
may differ from that of equity options. We will review these points individually. 
HISTORY 
In the short life of listed option trading. there have been several major changes in the 
tax rules. When options were first listed in 1973, the tax laws treated the gains and 
losses from writing options as ordinary income. That is, the thinking was that only 
professionals or those people in the business actually wrote over-the-counter options, 
and thus their gains and losses represented their ordinary income, or means of mak­
ing a living. This rule presented some interesting strategies involving spreads, 
because the long side of the spread could be treated as long-term gain (if held for 
908 
